==============================================================================
NRC HRTD  General Electric BWR/4 Technology Manual (R-304B)
1.8 Thermal Limits  —  0518 - R304B - GE BWR_4 Technology - 1.8 Thermal Limits.
ADAMS ML11258A297   문서일자 2011-09-23   48 쪽   종류 본문
원본 https://www.nrc.gov/docs/ML1125/ML11258A297.pdf
이 파일은 manual/fetch_r304b.py 가 ADAMS 검색 API 에서 받은
NRC 추출 텍스트다. 손으로 고치지 않는다 — 다시 받으면 덮어쓴다.
==============================================================================


 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

General Electric Systems Technology Manual 
 

Chapter 1.8 
 

Thermal Limits 
 





 
Rev 09/11 1.8-i USNRC HRTD 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

1.8 THERMAL LIMITS .................................................................................................... 1 
 
1.8.1 Introduction ........................................................................................................ 1 
 
1.8.2 Thermal Limit Description................................................................................... 2 
 
1.8.3 Background Information ..................................................................................... 3 

1.8.3.1 Heat Transfer ................................................................................................ 3 
1.8.3.2 Fluid Flow ..................................................................................................... 4 
1.8.3.3 Boiling Heat Transfer .................................................................................... 5 

 
1.8.4 Fuel Damage ...................................................................................................... 6 
 
1.8.5 Critical Power Ratio (CPR) ................................................................................. 7 

1.8.5.1 The GEXL Correlation .................................................................................. 7 
1.8.5.2 The MCPR Safety Limit ................................................................................ 9 
1.8.5.3 MCPR Modifications for Limiting Transients ................................................. 9 
1.8.5.4 The Thermal Power Safety Limit ................................................................. 10 

 
1.8.6 Linear Heat Generation Rate (LHGR) .............................................................. 11 

1.8.6.1 Elasticity and Plasticity ............................................................................... 11 
1.8.6.2 The LHGR (Thermal Hydraulic) Limit .......................................................... 11 

 
1.8.7 Average Planer Linear Heat Generation Rate (APLHGR) ................................ 12 

1.8.7.1 The APLHGR (ECCS LOCA) Limit ............................................................. 12 
1.8.7.2 APLHGR Modifications ............................................................................... 13 
1.8.7.3 ECCS/LOCA and Thermal-Mechanical Limits ............................................ 13 

 
1.8.8 Methods to Prevent Exceeding Thermal Limits ................................................ 14 

1.8.8.1 Technical Specification Safety Limits (Figure 1.8-16) ................................. 14 
1.8.8.2 Technical Specification Operating Limits (Figure 1.8-16) ........................... 14 

 
1.8.9 Plant Process Computer .................................................................................. 14 

1.8.9.1 Introduction ................................................................................................. 15 
1.8.9.2 Component Description .............................................................................. 16 
1.8.9.3 Data Results ............................................................................................... 17 

 
1.8.10 Summary .......................................................................................................... 18 

 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-ii USNRC HRTD 

LIST OF TABLES 
 
1.8-1 Comparison of BWR Core Parameters ........................................................... 19 
1.8-2 GEXL Bounding Parameter Values ................................................................. 21 
1.8-3 Thermal Limits Calculations ............................................................................ 23 
 
 
 

LIST OF FIGURES 
 
1.8-1 Thermal Limits 
1.8-2 Fuel Temperature Cross Section 
1.8-3 Regions of Boiling Heat Transfer 
1.8-4 Plot of Coolant and Fuel Bundle Temperature vs. Flow Path Length 
1.8-5 Forced Convection Boiling Curve 
1.8-6 Critical Power Ratio 
1.8-7 MCPR Limits 
1.8-8 MCPR Limit as Function of Average Scram Time 
1.8-9 Power-Dependent MCPR Multiplier (KP) 
1.8-10 Flow-Dependent MCPR Limits, MCPR (F) 
1.8-11 Typical Stress/Strain Curve for Ductile Metal 
1.8-12 Fuel Power versus Pellet/Clad Expansion 
1.8-13 Average Planar Linear Heat Generation Rate Limit vs. Average Planar 

Exposure 
1.8-14 MACFACF 
1.8-15 MACFACP 
1.8-16 Thermal Limits & Modifications (BWR/3/4/5, without "ARTS") 
1.8-17 Process Computer Simplified Block Diagram 
1.8-18 LPRM Adaptive Monitor Case Output (Sample Output) 
1.8-19 LPRM Adaptive Monitor Case (continued) 
1.8-20 Core Axial Array Definition 
1.8-21 Core Ring Array Definition 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-1 USNRC HRTD 

1.8 THERMAL LIMITS 
 
Learning objectives: 
 
1. Recognize the three mechanisms of heat transfer and where they occur from fuel 

centerline to bulk coolant. 
 
2. Recognize the characteristics of a typical fuel to coolant temperature profile. 
 
3. Recognize the regions of heat transfer that occur along the heated length of a fuel 

pin.  
 
4. Recognize the shape and the regions of the forced convection pool boiling curve. 
 
5. Recognize what is meant by fuel damage and the thermal limit mechanisms that 

may cause it. 
 

6. Recognize the characteristics and significant points of a typical stress-strain curve. 
 

7. Recognize what is meant by the following terms: 
a. Critical Power Ratio (CPR) 
b. Linear Heat Generation Rate (LHGR) 
c. Average Planar Linear Heat Generation Rate (APLHGR) 
 

8. For each of the thermal limits: 
a. Recognize the associated failure mechanism, cause and limiting condition. 
b. Recognize the method to prevent exceeding the limitation. 
 

9. Recognize the purposes of the Process ComputerDescribe the three mechanisms of 
heat transfer and where they occur from fuel centerline to bulk coolant. 

 
1.8.1 Introduction 
 
Thermal limits are provided to minimize the radiological release from the plant during 
normal operation, transient operation, and accidents by restricting plant operation so 
that fuel cladding integrity is maintained. 
 
Normal operation is that condition in which the plant is operated up to the licensed 
power level and within all other conditions and limitations of the operating license, 
technical specifications and the final safety analysis report.  In this condition the plant 
may be operated continuously. 
 
Transient operation is that condition of operation in which an abnormality has occurred 
resulting in challenges to continued plant operation.  The allowable abnormalities are 
those which were originally designed for and reasonably expected to occur at least once 
over the entire operating life of the facility.  Examples can be found described as 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-2 USNRC HRTD 

Abnormal Operational Transients in the plant specific Final Safety Analysis Report and 
includes items such as a loss of the feedwater system or main turbine trip. 
 
Accidents are those conditions of very low probability of occurrence yet are analyzed to 
result in the most significant challenges to the health and safety of the public with 
respect to radiation dose.  These conditions are also described in the plant specific 
Final Safety Analysis Report and include items such as a large loss of coolant accident 
or a control rod drop accident. 
 
1.8.2 Thermal Limit Description 
 
As you study this chapter, it is important to recognize that all references to plant power 
are to be interpreted as thermal power.  Thermal power is the heat generation rate or 
heat flux that results from the fission process.  Another power representation is referred 
to a neutron power and is what we measure with our nuclear instrumentation.  Neutron 
power is the neutron population density or number of neutrons in the core.  The 
difference between the two is the time delay associated with heat transport from fuel 
centerline to the cladding/coolant interface.  This time delay is called the thermal time 
constant and has a value of 6-7 seconds.  The importance here is to recognize that 
because of this thermal time constant, normal power maneuvering, transients and 
accidents can cause large rapid changes in neutron population yet the thermal power 
response is much more tempered and delayed.  For example, a small transient that 
results in a spike up in neutron population that immediately returns to its previous value 
will have little noticeable affect in clad surface temperatures. 
 
Two thermal limits are provided for normal operation and transient events to maintain 
the integrity of the fuel cladding.  This objective is achieved by limiting fuel rod power 
density to avoid overstressing the fuel cladding because of fuel pellet-cladding 
differential expansion and by maintaining nucleate boiling around the fuel rods so that 
the transition to film boiling is avoided.  The thermal limits established for these 
purposes are the Linear Heat Generation Rate (LHGR) limit and the Critical Power 
Ratio (CPR) limit. 
 
One thermal limit is provided for postulated accidents to maintain the core geometry by 
minimizing the gross fuel cladding failure because of the heatup following a Loss of 
Coolant Accident (LOCA).  The thermal limit established for this purpose is the Average 
Planar Linear Heat Generation Rate (APLHGR) limit. 
 
The basic thermal limits are shown in Figure 1.8-1.  Table 1.8-1 gives typical values for 
BWR/3, BWR/4, BWR/5, and BWR/6 core parameters and is provided for reference 
only. 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-3 USNRC HRTD 

1.8.3 Background Information 
 
In order to understand the BWR thermal limits, it is necessary to have an understanding 
of related background material such as heat transfer and fluid flow characteristics.  This 
subject material is discussed in the paragraphs that follow using Figure 1.8-2. 
 
1.8.3.1 Heat Transfer 
 
During reactor operation, heat is transferred from the fuel center line to the coolant 
which comes into contact with the outer fuel cladding surface.  The heat can be 
transferred by conduction, convection, or radiation.  Conduction and convection are the 
primary modes of heat transfer during normal and transient conditions.  Radiation 
becomes significant during accident conditions. 
 
1.8.3.1.1 Conduction 
 
When heat is applied to a material, the kinetic energy of the atoms or molecules of the 
material is increased.  Because of this increase in kinetic energy, the particles have a 
greater tendency to collide with each other.  When these collisions occur, the particles 
transmit a portion of their kinetic energy to neighboring atoms.  This is conduction or 
heat transfer by virtue of physical contact without the influence of a flowing medium. 
 
This is the process by which heat generated in the fuel pellet is transmitted to the outer 
pellet surface.  In relation to the fuel rod, this conduction flow is in a horizontal plane 
from the fuel center line to the pellet outer surface.  Conduction is also the primary heat 
transfer mechanism through the fuel cladding. 
 
1.8.3.1.2 Convection 
 
Convection is the process of transmitting heat from a heated surface or area to a fluid 
by circulation or mixing of the fluid.  Convection takes place only in fluids. 
 
The application in this case deals with a fluid flowing past a metallic fuel/cladding 
surface.  Fluids have a tendency to adhere to solid surfaces resulting in the formation of 
a stagnant film on the surface.  This film is normally very thin and heat is transferred 
across this film by a combination of conduction and convection.  After the heat 
penetrates the film, it is transferred rapidly through the remainder of the fluid by 
convection. 
 
The resistance of heat flow is so low that there is virtually no temperature variation 
through the bulk of the fluid (coolant) at any given elevation along the fuel rod. 
 
Although much less efficient, convection is the primary means of heat transfer through 
the gap between the fuel pellet and the inside cladding surface.  In this case, the fluid is 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-4 USNRC HRTD 

not under forced flow conditions and therefore a larger delta-T is required to transfer the 
same amount of heat. 
 
1.8.3.1.3 Radiation 
 
Radiation heat transfer is the transmission of heat in the form of radiant energy from 
one object to another across an intervening space.  This form of heat transfer is avoided 
in nuclear power plants because very high temperature differentials are required to 
transfer the same amount of heat as compared to conduction and convection.  If high 
temperatures were allowed to occur, the materials would degrade.  During worst case 
accident conditions, it is assumed that the loss of water as a convection heat transfer 
medium results in fuel centerline heat transfer primarily by radiation. 
 
1.8.3.2 Fluid Flow 
 
Figure 1.8-3 shows the different flow patterns which can exist in a fuel bundle during 
normal operation.  As coolant enters the fuel bundle, it is slightly subcooled, (single 
phase liquid) and begins to gain heat from the forced flow convection mechanism.  
Because of subcooling, there is little or no bubble formation.  As energy is gained, the 
coolant temperature increases until nucleate boiling with its attendant bubble formation 
begins.  Early states of nucleate boiling (bubble flow) occur while the bulk coolant in the 
bundle is below liquid saturation enthalpy, and the bubbles readily collapse as the 
turbulent flow and their buoyancy sweeps them away from the cladding surface.  A point 
will be reached where the bulk coolant enthalpy is at liquid saturation, (bulk boiling) and 
the bubbles will no longer collapse in the coolant as they are swept away.  The bubbles 
now begin to exist separately throughout the bulk coolant, causing a significant steam 
fraction to be present in the coolant.  From this point to the bundle outlet, the bubbles 
continue to form at the fuel rod surface (nucleate boiling) and to be swept into the 
coolant and begin to coalesce (slug flow) into larger and larger slugs of steam.  At the 
outlet of very highest powered fuel bundles, steam may fill most of the bundle flow area 
between fuel rods, but a thin annulus of water (annular flow) adheres to the fuel rod 
surfaces.  In this annular flow region, the wetted rod surface is still transferring heat 
through the nucleate boiling mechanism.  The mist flow region is known for poor heat 
transfer characteristics due to the steam blanket acting as a better insulator than 
conductor.  This region is avoided as will be discussed later.  Entry into the mist flow 
region is defined by the Departure from Nucleate Boiling (DNB) also known as Onset of 
Transition Boiling (OTB) or Critical Heat Flux (CHF).  This region is avoided during 
normal and transient operations yet is considered in the evaluation of accident 
conditions. 
 
1.8.3.2.1 Fuel Channel Parameter Characteristics 
 
Figure 1.8-4 shows a plot of coolant and fuel bundle temperature versus flow path 
length of an average fuel bundle.  Coolant enters the bottom of the core, flows upward 
around the fuel rods, and absorbs energy from heat transfer originating from the nuclear 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-5 USNRC HRTD 

process.  Because of the peculiar characteristics of neutron-caused fission reactions, 
the average heat flux (Q/A) produced from fission in the core assumes a shape 
somewhat like that shown in Figure 1.8-4.  The highest heat flux is in the core interior, 
hence some fuel bundles have a higher than average heat flux while some have a lower 
than average heat flux. 
 
The coolant temperature curve rises as heat is added, until temperature saturation 
occurs, and coolant bulk boiling begins.  From this point the coolant temperature 
remains constant all the way to core outlet.  Because the coolant is changing phase, the 
coolant temperature profile is not altogether descriptive of coolant energy increase.  A 
better description is obtained by plotting coolant enthalpy change, which continuously 
increases from core inlet to outlet, with the largest rate of increase at the maximum 
value of heat flux. 
 
The curve for fuel rod surface temperature rises and then levels at a constant value 
above coolant temperature.  The initial rise is caused by the ΔT across the film required 
to accommodate the heat flux (Q/A) during single phase forced convection heat 
transfer.  The fuel rod temperature levels off when nucleate boiling starts.  Nucleate 
boiling is an excellent heat transfer mode; therefore, even thought the heat flux 
increases, the ΔT across the boiling film remains relatively constant. 
 
The curve for fuel rod center line temperature is above that of the fuel surface 
temperature.  The amount that the center line temperature is greater than surface 
temperature depends directly on the heat flux.  The beneficial effects of nucleate boiling 
on center line temperature can also be seen.  As long as nucleate boiling is occurring 
on the fuel rod surface, the fuel rod surface temperature is only slightly greater than 
liquid temperature.  This, in turn, keeps the fuel center line temperature at a lower value 
than if single phase convection were the mode of heat transfer from surface to liquid. 
 
1.8.3.2.2 Fuel Temperature Profile 
 
Figure 1.8-2 illustrates a typical fuel temperature cross section with nucleate boiling at a 
high heat flux.  The beneficial effect of nucleate boiling can be seen.  As long as 
nucleate boiling is occurring on the fuel rod surface, the fuel rod surface temperature is 
only slightly greater than liquid temperature.  This, in turn, keeps the fuel center line 
temperature at a lower value than if single phase convection were the mode of heat 
transfer from surface to liquid. 
 
1.8.3.3 Boiling Heat Transfer 
 
The boiling heat transfer curve is shown in Figure 1.8-5.  The amount of heat 
transferred from the fuel cladding to the coolant is greatly affected by the coolant 
properties and by the thermal and hydraulic conditions of the coolant.  The rate at which 
heat is transferred from the cladding, the heat flux, is dependent on the specific 
temperature difference between the cladding and the coolant (ΔT) and the heat transfer 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-6 USNRC HRTD 

coefficient.  The heat flux may be plotted against the temperature difference between 
the cladding and the coolant.  This curve can be divided into boiling regions 
corresponding to the regions shown in Figure 1.8-3.  The heat transfer coefficient in 
each region is controlled by the mode of heat transfer in that region. 
 
The first region is single phase convection heat transfer.  The heat flux increases 
somewhat with increased ΔT. 
 
The second region is associated with subcooled nucleate boiling.  Subcooled nucleate 
boiling is boiling that occurs at the cladding surface while the bulk coolant temperature 
is not yet at saturation temperature.  The steam bubbles may collapse before departing 
from the cladding surface or they will collapse as they enter the subcooled region after 
departing from the surface.  This mode of convective heat transfer is a complicated 
mixture of single phase convection and nucleate boiling modes of heat transfer. 
 
The next region is fully developed nucleate boiling also called bulk boiling.  Nucleate 
boiling is a very efficient mode of heat transfer because of high turbulence created by 
the boiling process.  Annular flow exists at the outlet of high power fuel assemblies 
during normal operation.  The fuel rod surface remains in a well cooled, nucleate boiling 
type of heat transfer state.  Nucleate boiling is maintained in the core in all modes of 
normal operation and in all transient conditions caused by a single operator error or 
equipment malfunction. 
 
The heat flux increases as the temperature difference between the cladding and the 
coolant increases.  There is a point where a slight rise in heat flux requires a very large 
ΔT to transfer the heat.  This is a transition boiling regime where the boiling mode 
changes from nucleate boiling to film boiling.  Entry to this region is highly unstable and 
is characterized by the intermittent physical rewetting of the heated surface by the 
coolant.  The beginning of this region is called Onset of Transition Boiling (OTB) and is 
labeled so on Figure 1.8-5.  The OTB point is avoided in the BWR by remaining within 
the Critical Power Ratio (CPR) thermal limit. 
 
The crosshatched region represents temperature oscillations which take place during 
transition boiling.  At a given heat flux the clad surface temperature will oscillate 
between a point on the right in the crosshatched region and a point on the left in the 
crosshatched region along a horizontal line.  This is caused by intermittent physical 
rewetting of the clad surface. At OTB, the temperature oscillations reach 25ºF in 
magnitude, which is used to define the critical power point or critical heat flux. 
 
1.8.4 Fuel Damage 
 
Fuel damage is defined for design purposes as perforation of the cladding, which 
permits release of fission products.  The mechanisms which could cause fuel damage in 
reactor transients are: 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-7 USNRC HRTD 

• Fatigue failure of the fuel cladding caused by the Onset of Transition Boiling.  This 
fuel damage results from local temperature oscillations of the cladding.  The Critical 
Power Ratio (CPR) thermal limit provides protection against this failure mechanism. 

 
• Rupture of the fuel cladding because of strain caused by relative expansion 

differences between the uranium dioxide (UO2) pellet and the fuel cladding.  The 
Linear Heat Generation Rate (LHGR) thermal limit provides protection against this 
failure mechanism. 

 
• The loss of convective heat transfer during accident conditions replaced by the less 

efficient radiation heat transfer mechanism resulting in severe fuel cladding 
overheating.  The Average Planer Linear Heat Generation Rate (APLHGR) thermal 
limit provides protection against this failure mechanism. 

 
1.8.5 Critical Power Ratio (CPR) 
 
As discussed earlier, the critical power ratio thermal limit protects against fuel damage 
resulting from the loss of nucleate boiling by limiting the total power that a given fuel 
bundle is allowed to produce. 
 
1.8.5.1 The GEXL Correlation 
 
The General Electric Critical Quality (Xc) vs. Boiling Length (LB) (GEXL) correlation 
predicts the onset of transition boiling.  The OTB point is a function of many parameters 
including: 
• local steam quality 
• local heat flux 
• coolant mass flow rate 
• bundle boiling length (LB) 
• pressure 
• flow geometry 
• core inlet sub-cooling 
• local peaking patterns 
 
The General Electric (GE) Company conducted extensive experimental investigations of 
the transition boiling event and its relation to these parameters over their design range. 
 
The boiling transition testing was done at the Atlas Test Facility in San Jose, California, 
which was specifically designed to simulate reactor conditions and to handle transients 
as well as steady state conditions.  The Atlas Test Facility test fuel bundle components 
(lower tie plate, fuel rod interim spacers, upper tie plate, fuel channel, and fuel bundle 
rods) were dimensionally the same as those used in the BWR.  The fuel rods were 
electrically heated to simulate nuclear heat.  Axial power shapes and local peaking of 
specific rods were simulated by varying the thickness of the fuel rod conductor.  The 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-8 USNRC HRTD 

fuel rods which were expected to achieve OTB were instrumented with thermocouples 
to monitor temperature changes. 
 
The testing procedure involved constructing a bundle with the desired axial power 
shape and local peaking factor and then establishing a constant system pressure, 
bundle flow rate, and inlet subcooling.  The power in the test bundle was slowly 
increased until OTB was indicated.  A rod thermocouple was considered to be indicating 
a boiling transition condition when about 25ºF rod surface temperature oscillations were 
observed.  The bundle power at this point was defined as critical power. 
 
The data for each boiling transition point was recorded and the inlet subcooling was 
changed for the next test.  The inlet subcooling was varied for each test until the desired 
range had been covered.  A similar procedure was used to study the variation in the 
OTB point relative to changes in reactor pressure, inlet flow, axial power shape, and 
local peaking. 
 
The test results of the ATLAS Test Facility were analyzed extensively to find a 
correlation that could be used to predict how close actual operating conditions are to 
OTB.  GE chose the critical quality versus boiling length correlation to evaluate the 
boiling transition data because it is independent of axial flux profile and subcooling, it 
yields good precision, and it is fairly simple to apply in both design and operation. 
 
Critical quality Xc is defined as the fuel bundle planar quality at the plane where boiling 
transition occurs, and boiling length LB (Figure 1.8-3) is defined as the distance from the 
plane where bulk saturation conditions are reached to the plane where boiling transition 
occurs. 
 
The previous description can be seen in the GEXL correlation curve in Figure 1.8-6 
which shows that, for a specific reactor condition, boiling transition occurs at a distance 
LB from the plane of saturation if the quality rises to the critical quality Xc.  Both the axial 
elevation where saturation occurs and the quality at any axial elevation can be easily 
calculated by doing an enthalpy balance on the fuel bundle.  This makes the 
determination of the CPR using the GEXL correlation relatively simple to apply to 
existing operating conditions. 
 
Line (1) of Figure 1.8-6 represents a heat balance plot of average steam quality versus 
distance along an operating fuel bundle from the start of bulk boiling.  For the same 
initial parameters as the operating bundle (mass flow rate, pressure, etc.), line (3) 
represents the quality-boiling length points which would result in transition boiling.  By 
successively increasing bundle power from its initial level, a set of curves, located 
somewhere above curve (1), can be generated until the bundle power is high enough 
that its curve becomes tangent at some point to the correlation curve (3).  The bundle 
power corresponding to curve (2) is the critical power, or the bundle power that is 
required to cause transition boiling in the bundle at the reactor conditions of interest. 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-9 USNRC HRTD 

The GEXL correlation is valid over the range of conditions used in the tests of the data 
used to develop the correlation.  These conditions are listed in Table 1.8-2. 
 
1.8.5.2 The MCPR Safety Limit 
 
Critical power is the fuel bundle power required to cause transition boiling somewhere in 
the fuel bundle.  The Critical Power Ratio (CPR) of a fuel bundle is the ratio of its critical 
power to the actual fuel bundle operating power.  The CPR is a measure of how close to 
transition boiling a fuel bundle is operating.  The minimum CPR value for all fuel 
bundles in the core is the Minimum Critical Power Ratio (MCPR) and represents the fuel 
bundle which is the closest to transition boiling.  MCPR limits are imposed to avoid fuel 
damage due to fatigue failure when cladding surface temperatures experience large 
(>25 degrees) oscillations due to transition from nucleate to film boiling (OTB). 
 
The MCPR safety limit is determined by safety analysis for each core reload and 
typically has a value of approximately 1.07.  Fuel cycle operation within the limitation (> 
1.07) ensures that in the event of an abnormal operating transient more than 99.9% of 
the fuel rods in the core are expected to avoid transition boiling.  The margin between 
an MCPR of 1.0 (onset of transition boiling) and the safety limit is derived from a 
detailed statistical analysis of uncertainties in monitoring the operating state of the core 
and in the boiling transition correlation. 
 
1.8.5.3 MCPR Modifications for Limiting Transients 
 
The required MCPR at steady state operating conditions is derived from the MCPR 
safety limit of approximately 1.07, and an analysis of abnormal operational transients.  
The types of transients evaluated include turbine trip without bypass valves, generator 
load rejection without bypass valves, feedwater controller failure, pressure regulator 
failure downscale, loss of feedwater heating, fuel loading error, and rod withdrawal 
error.  The evaluations determined the change in CPR (ΔCPR) caused by the positive 
reactivity introduced by these conditions.  To ensure that the MCPR safety limit is not 
exceeded during any anticipated abnormal operational transient, the most limiting 
transients have been analyzed to determine those which result in the largest reduction 
in CPR (ΔCPR).   
 
The operating MCPR limit is obtained by addition of the maximum ΔCPR value for the 
most limiting transient (including any imposed adjustment factors) to the MCPR safety 
limit as shown in Figure 1.8-7. 
 
The pressurization transient is analyzed using computer models to obtain the ΔCPR for 
the core.  The licensing basis OLMCPR is given as: 
 
OLMCPR = MCPR Safety Limit +ΔCPR and a typical value ranges from 1.2 to 1.5 
depending upon fuel type.  Most fuels in current use (GE-14/GNF-4) are around 1.44. 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-10 USNRC HRTD 

Another approach is a statistical determination of the transient ΔCPR values such that 
there is a 95% probability with 95% confidence (95/95) that the event will not cause the 
CPR to fall below the MCPR safety limit.  Utilities using this option must demonstrate 
that their control rod scram insertion times are consistent with that used in the statistical 
analysis.  This is accomplished through technical specification surveillances which 
require testing and ensures adjustment of the operating limit MCPR if the scram speed 
is outside the assumed distribution.  Since slower average scram times result in a 
slower termination of transients, adjustments in the allowable MCPR operating value 
ensure fuel damage does not occur under these conditions.  Figure 1.8-8 is a typical 
curve where Tau (T) is the time, in seconds, that average scram times are longer than 
the analysis average scram times plotted against the appropriate MCPR limitation.  This 
curve will appear for all different fuel types in the current cycle core load.  
 
At conditions of less than 100% core flow or less than 100% power, the MCPR 
operating limit is additionally adjusted.  During these operational conditions, transients 
such as rod withdrawal errors, feedwater controller failures, or recirculation pump run 
out become more limiting than pressurization transients.  For this reason, the operating 
limit MCPR is raised to compensate.  For reactor power conditions between 25% and 
30% the MCPR operating limit is provided in Figure 1.8-9.  For reactor power conditions 
greater than 30% power the MCPR operating limit is the greater of either (1) the flow-
dependent MCPR limit shown in Figure 1.8-10 or (2) the appropriate kp given by Figure 
1.8-9, multiplied by the rated flow and rated power limit obtained from Figure 1.8-8.  
These reduced flow or power limits are established to protect the core from inadvertent 
core flow or power increases. 
 
1.8.5.4 The Thermal Power Safety Limit 
 
The use of the GEXL correlation is not valid for all critical power calculations at 
pressures below 785 psig (800 psia) or core flows less than 10% of rated flow.  
Therefore, the fuel cladding integrity safety limit, under these plant conditions, is 
established by other means.  This is done by limiting core thermal power to 25% of 
rated when reactor pressure is below 785 psig.  Since the pressure drop in the bypass 
region is essentially all elevation head, the core pressure drop at low power and flows 
will always be greater than 4.5 psi.  Analyses show that with a bundle flow of 28 x 103 
lb/hr, bundle pressure drop is nearly independent of bundle power and has a value of 
3.5 psi.  Thus, the bundle flow with a 4.5 psi driving head will be greater than 28 x 103 
lb/hr.  Full scale ATLAS test data taken at pressures from 14.7 psia to 800 psia indicate 
that the fuel assembly critical power at this flow is approximately 3.35 MWt.  With the 
design peaking factors, this corresponds to a thermal power of more than 50% of rated 
thermal power.  Thus, a thermal power limit of 25% of rated thermal power for reactor 
pressure below 785 psig is conservative. 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-11 USNRC HRTD 

1.8.6 Linear Heat Generation Rate (LHGR) 
 
As discussed earlier, the linear heat generation rate thermal limit limits fuel pin power to 
protect against fuel damage resulting from fuel and cladding differential expansion that 
could result in excessive cladding stresses. 
 

1.8.6.1 Elasticity and Plasticity 

 
Suppose stress (force acting upon a unit area) is plotted as a function of the 
corresponding strain (elongation).  If Hooke's law is obeyed, stress is directly 
proportional to strain and the graph is a straight line. Real materials show several types 
of departures from this idealized behavior. 
 
Figure 1.8-11 shows a typical stress-strain graph for a metal such as copper or soft iron.  
The stress in this case is a simple tensile stress, and the strain is shown as the percent 
elongation.  The first portion of the curve, up to a strain of less than 1%, is a straight 
line, indicating Hooke's-law behavior with stress directly proportional to strain.  This 
straight-line portion ends at point a; the stress at this point is called the proportional 
limit. 
 
From a to b, stress and strain are no longer proportional, but if the load is removed at 
any point between a and b, the curve is retraced and the material returns to its original 
length.  In the entire region, a to b, the material is said to be elastic or to show elastic 
behavior.  Point b, the end of this region, is called the yield point, and the corresponding 
stress is called the elastic limit.  Up to this point the forces exerted by the material are 
conservative.  When the load is removed, the material returns to its original shape, and 
the energy put into the material in causing the deformation is removed.  The 
deformation is said to be reversible. 
 
If the stress is increased further, the strain increases rapidly, but when the load is 
removed at some point beyond b, say c, the material does not come back to its original 
length but traverses the thin line in Figure 1.8-11.  The length at zero stress is now 
greater than the original length, and the material is said to have a permanent set.  
Further increase of load beyond c produces a large increase in strain (even if the stress 
decreases) until a point d is reached at which fracture takes place.  From b to d, the 
material is said to undergo plastic flow, or plastic deformation.  Plastic deformation is 
irreversible; when the stress is removed, the material does not return to its original 
state.  If a large amount of plastic deformation takes place between the elastic limit and 
the fracture point, the metal is said to be ductile; but if fracture occurs soon after the 
elastic limit is passed, the metal is said to be brittle. 
 
1.8.6.2 The LHGR (Thermal Hydraulic) Limit 
 
LHGR is heat flux integrated over every square centimeter of cladding surface for one 
linear foot of fuel rod.  Limits on LHGR are set to restrict the strain on the fuel cladding 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-12 USNRC HRTD 

because of relative expansion of the fuel pellets and the cladding.  A value of 1% plastic 
strain of the cladding is conservatively defined as a threshold below which fuel damage 
due to fuel cladding overstraining is not expected to occur. 
 
Relative expansion arises from several sources: 
• the UO2 fuel thermal expansion coefficient is approximately twice that of zircaloy 
• the fuel pellets operate at higher temperatures than the cladding 
• the fuel pellets undergo irradiation growth as they are exposed 
• the fuel pellets crack and redistribute toward the cladding because of thermal stress. 
 
Cladding cracking because of differential expansion of pellet and cladding is prevented 
by limiting fuel pin power so that 1% plastic strain does not occur.  Figure 1.8.12 shows 
the relative contact between the cladding and the fuel pellet during (a) low power, (b) 
medium power and (c) high power conditions.  If the deformation of condition (c) is 
maintained below the 1% plastic strain value, permanent deformation is not expected to 
occur and repeated occurrences are not expected to result in fuel damage.  In other 
words, when a fuel rod power level changes from high to low, the lower strain value 
allows the deformed cladding to return to its original shape. 
 
The linear heat generation rate required to cause 1% cladding strain in 8 x 8 fuel pin is 
approximately 25 KW/ft for non-irradiated fuel, but decreases with burnup to a value of 
approximately 20 KW/ft at a local exposure of 40,000 MWd/sT. 
 
The LHGR for 8 x 8 fuel is 13.4 KW/ft, which provides a margin to the 1% plastic strain 
threshold.  The LHGR limit for newer 8 x 8 fuel and 9 x 9 fuel is 14.4 KW/ft. 
 
1.8.7 Average Planer Linear Heat Generation Rate (APLHGR) 
 
As discussed earlier, the average planer linear heat generation rate thermal limit limits 
fuel node power levels to protect against fuel damage resulting the fuel overheating 
caused by the loss of coolant accident. 
 
1.8.7.1 The APLHGR (ECCS LOCA) Limit 
 
APLHGR is the average LHGR of all fuel rods in a given fuel bundle in a given 
horizontal plane (actually a 6 inch segment or node).  This parameter is important in the 
core heatup analysis for a LOCA. 
 
In the event of a LOCA, the heat stored in the fuel at the time of the accident and the 
decay heat produced following the accident could significantly damage the fuel.  In the 
case of some LOCAs, nucleate boiling is maintained around the fuel long enough for the 
majority of the stored energy in the fuel to be conducted to the coolant; thus fuel 
damage is minimized.  In the design basis LOCA, however, the core region is voided of 
coolant in a relatively short time.  Once water is removed from the cladding, radiation is 
the only heat transfer mechanism.  If the fuel was previously operating at a high power 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-13 USNRC HRTD 

level, the stored energy in the fuel could lead to a gross cladding failure and possible 
severe degradation of core geometry.   
 
Gross cladding failure is prevented by placing a limit on the power level which would 
result in a peak cladding temperature (PCT) of 2200ºF following a LOCA.  The thermal 
limit specified is the APLHGR which is used because the PCT following a postulated 
LOCA is primarily a function of the average heat generation rate of all the rods of a fuel 
assembly at any axial location and is dependent only secondarily on the rod-to-rod 
power distribution within an assembly. 
 
The thermal limit in this case is given in terms of the incore Maximum APLHGR 
(MAPLHGR) and is specified for each individual fuel type as a function of fuel exposure.  
The units of the MAPLHGR are the same as those of the LHGR (KW/ft) even though the 
parameters are different.  Typical MAPLHGR limiting values are depicted in Figure 1.8-
13. 
 
1.8.7.2 APLHGR Modifications 
 
Similar to the MCPR operating limit, the APLHGR limit is further adjusted for low flow 
(Figure 1.8-14) or low power (Figure 1.8-15) conditions.  These adjustments assure that 
the fuel thermal-mechanical design criteria are preserved during abnormal transients 
initiated from off rated flow or power conditions. 
 
MAPFACf is usually determined by the recirculation pump runout event results. 
MAPFACp is usually determined from the feedwater controller failure event results.   
 
Below PBypass, there is significant sensitivity to core flow during transients.  PBypass is 
defined as the power level at which a reactor scram on turbine stop valve 
position/turbine control valve fast closure is bypassed.  For this reason the MAPFACp is 
further defined separately for a high flow (>50% core flow) and a low flow condition 
(≤50%). 

1.8.7.3 ECCS/LOCA and Thermal-Mechanical Limits 

 
The ECCS/LOCA limit (APLHGR) and the thermal-mechanical limit (LHGR) can be 
combined into one number.  Current GE BWR MAPLHGR limits (as a function of 
exposure) are based on the most limiting value of either the ECCS/LOCA limits or the 
thermal-mechanical design limits.  Since the thermal-mechanical design limit is included 
in the determination of the MAPLHGR limit, it can not be exceeded if the MAPLHGR 
limit is met.  Separate specification of the steady state thermal-mechanical limit in the 
Technical Specifications is redundant.  Therefore, GE has proposed and the NRC has 
agreed that the separate, redundant steady state thermal-mechanical limits be 
eliminated from Technical Specification.  The MAPLHGR limit will continue to provide 
assurance that the limits in 10CFR50.46 will not be exceeded, and that the fuel design 
analysis limits defined in NEDE-24011-P-A (GESTAR-II) will be met. 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-14 USNRC HRTD 

1.8.8 Methods to Prevent Exceeding Thermal Limits 
 
1.8.8.1 Technical Specification Safety Limits (Figure 1.8-16) 
 
The thermal limits listed in the plant technical specifications include two safety limits.  
Allowable values for these limitations are typically found in the Core Operating Limits 
Report (COLR), a subset of technical specifications, produced for each core reload. 
 
The MCPR safety limit is a minimum value of approximately 1.07.  The Limiting Safety 
System Settings (LSSS) of the RPS, in conjunction with a higher operating MCPR LCO 
discussed in Section 1.8.5.3, prevent exceeding the safety limit even during abnormal 
operational transients.  This safety limit is applicable with reactor pressure >785 psig, 
core flow >10% of rated flow and core thermal power >25%. 
 
The core thermal power safety limit, applicable when reactor pressure <785 psig or core 
flow <10% of rated, is 25% of rated core thermal power.  The LSSS of the RPS 
(specifically the fixed APRM scram at 15% of rated power with the reactor mode switch 
not in the run position) prevent exceeding the safety limit. 
 
1.8.8.2 Technical Specification Operating Limits (Figure 1.8-16) 
 
The thermal limits listed in the plant technical specifications include three Limiting 
Conditions for Operation (LCO).  Allowable values for these limitations are typically 
found in the Core Operating Limits Report (COLR), a subset of technical specifications, 
produced for each core reload. 
 
The LCO for the MCPR Operating Limit was discussed with the MCPR Safety Limit in 
1.8.8.1 above. 
 
The LCO for LHGR is a typical maximum value of 13.4 KW/ft (for older style fuels).  The 
LHGR limit can be exceeded during abnormal operational transients but is limited by the 
Limiting Safety System Settings (LSSS) of the Reactor Protection System (RPS).  The 
Average Power Range Monitor (APRM) System high power scram setpoint value is a 
maximum of 120% of rated power.  Thus, with the core at 100% power and some fuel 
rod operating at its design LHGR (13.4 KW/ft), the maximum LHGR achieved by that 
fuel rod is 16.08 KW/ft (13.4 KW/ft x 120%), which is still well below the LHGR required 
to cause 1% plastic strain. 
 
The LCO for MAPLHGR is listed in graph form as a function of fuel type and exposure.  
Administrative control (procedures and technical specification license requirements) is 
the only method to prevent exceeding this thermal limit. 
 
 
 
1.8.9 Plant Process Computer 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-15 USNRC HRTD 

1.8.9.1 Introduction 
 
The purposes of the process computer (including the 3D monicore subroutines) are to: 
• provide on-line monitoring of significant plant process variables. 
• scan the inputs and issue appropriate alarms and messages if limits are exceeded. 
• use appropriate input data to complete various plant performance monitoring 

calculations. 
• provide the operator with periodic and on demand plant performance data and 

reports. 
• provide data necessary for the maintenance of optimum core power distribution, 

economical utilization of fuel and overall plant operating efficiency. 
• use operator input data to predict the effects on core performance. 
 
The Process Computer System provides on-line monitoring of several hundred input 
points representing significant plant process variables. The system scans digital and 
analog inputs at specific intervals and issues appropriate alarm indications and 
messages if monitored analog values exceed predefined limits or if digital trip signals 
occur. It performs calculations with selected input data to provide the operator with 
essential plant performance information through a variety of logs, trends, summaries, 
and other typewriter data arrays. Computer outputs include various front panel displays, 
printers, typers and status indications. 
 
The primary function is to perform reactor core calculations and provide the plant 
operating staff with current core performance information. 
 
The 3D Monicore is a typical system of computer programs designed to monitor and 
predict important core parameters. As such it is divided into two major functions, the 
"monitor" and the "predictor". Both components use a three dimensional BWR core 
simulator called "Panacea." The term Panacea in refers to the computer program that 
also is known as PANAC09. Panacea calculates the reactor's power, moderator, void, 
and flow distributions. From these, other parameters such as margin to thermal limits, 
fuel exposure, and Preconditioning Interim Operating Management Recommendations 
(PICOMR) envelope data can be determined. 
 
The 3D Monicore monitor function is designed to track current reactor parameters 
automatically or on demand. The predictor function runs upon user request. It predicts 
core parameters for reactor states other than the present one. 3D monicore's accuracy 
is enhanced by making use of in-core neutron flux measurements. Nodal fit coefficients 
are calculated such that Panacea calculated, TIP (Traversing In-core Probe) readings 
are identical to actual TIP readings. These fit coefficients may be utilized for later 
monitor and predictor cases. The process of calculating and using fit coefficients is 
called 3D Monicore's "adaptive process". Results of adaptive cases match expected 
operating parameters more closely than results of standard non-adaptive cases. 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-16 USNRC HRTD 

 
1.8.9.2 Component Description 
 
The major components of the process computer are discussed in the paragraphs that 
follow. 
 
1.8.9.2.1 Computer Hardware 
 
A simplified block diagram of a process computer system is shown in Figure 1.8-17. 
Analog voltage and current inputs representing reactor flux levels, flows, pressures, 
temperatures, and power levels are applied to the analog input scanner. Digital (contact 
closure) inputs, which include various trips and alarms, TIP system signals, control rod 
positions, and rod worth minimizer inputs, are applied to the digital input scanner. Pulse 
inputs for TIP probe positions and gross generator energy are applied directly to the 
central processor. The central processor performs the calculations required for the 
program being run, assigns priorities to the various programs and computer functions, 
and contains a memory unit, which provides for data storage. Computer commands and 
input data originating from the computer operator's console, computer room console, or 
the rod worth minimizer components are routed through the central processor. 
 
An analog to digital converter changes the analog inputs into digital inputs for use by the 
computer. Program messages, logs, etc. are routed to the appropriate output typer. 
Other outputs from the central processor are distributed by the multiple output controller 
to controls, indicators and displays on the computer operators console, computer room 
console, rod worth minimizer panel, TIP system, rod position information system (RPIS) 
and to the VAX minicomputer. 
 
1.8.9.2.2 3D Monicore System 
 
3D Monicore operates on the plant's data acquisition system’s process computer and 
the 3D monicore VAX minicomputer. Special application and protocol programs control 
data flow between the process computer and the VAX. The process computer stores 
live data needed for 3D Monicore calculations in live memory. 
 
The three types of data scanned are analog, pulse, and digital. Analog inputs indicate 
continuously varying quantities such as flows, pressures, temperatures, and flux levels. 
Digital inputs indicate various trips and alarms. Pulse inputs are used with counting 
devices to represent TIP positions. Programs executed by the process computer control 
the scanning of input points at specific intervals, the testing of scanned values against 
predefined limits, and the activation of alarm messages. 
 
1.8.9.2.3 Core Monitoring Functions 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-17 USNRC HRTD 

The 3D Monicore System provides a variety of options for monitoring thermal limits, 
power distribution, and exposure updates. A monitor case automatically executes up to 
24 times a day. Users may run additional cases on demand. These manually demanded 
cases can be either official or unofficial. Official cases are used in plant statistics, while 
unofficial cases are for information only. FAST is an unofficial monitoring case which 
allows the user to obtain a quick estimate of thermal limits. 
 
1.8.9.2.4 Data Acquisition  
 
Periodically (every several seconds or several times a second) the data acquisition 
system scans plant data including nuclear instrumentation (APRMs and LPRMs), gross 
generator MWe, and reactor water level. A control rod position update occurs within 5 
seconds of a change. The data update also records plant heat balance results. These 
data are transferred to a segment of 3D Monicore system memory in the VAX allocated 
to the live plant data. Physically failed LPRM signals are flagged as a zero input. The 
live data, the wrapup file of the previous monitoring case, and various plant constants 
files, form the basis for the next monitoring case. 
 
1.8.9.2.4 Gross Energy Tracking (GET) 
 
Part of the data acquisition and transfer program updates cycle thermal and electrical 
energy. This program is called Gross Energy Tracking (GET). The gross thermal energy 
tracking function calculates energy increments for the entire core. 
 
The monitor case officially updates exposures of fuel and core components. It 
determines the difference between the value of GET's cycle thermal energy and the last 
monitor's cycle thermal energy. The 3D Monicore program runs a Panacea case which 
increases the fuel's exposure so that the core average exposure matches the most 
recent GET value. The LPRMs and control blades have their exposures updated based 
on the average flux in their local area. 
 
The input signals for the GET program are: 
 

Core Thermal Power MWT 
Generator Output MWE 
Time of Current Data 
Date of Current Data 

 

1.8.9.3 Data Results 

 
Data obtained and computed by the process computer and 3D Monicore functions can 
be displayed to the operating staff in the form of: 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-18 USNRC HRTD 

• panel mounted digital displays and recorders. 
• computer terminal selected displays 
• typer information and alarm line printouts 
• operator demanded and routine report output to line printers 
 
Figures 1.8-18 and 1.8-19 are an example of a 2 page routine or operator demanded 
report printed by the process computer.  This report is commonly referred to as the P-1 
edit or report.  The types of information found on this report include: 
• the top core locations operating closest to the MCPR (MFLCPR), LHGR (MFLPD) 

and MAPLHGR (MAPRAT) thermal limitation operating limits. 
• the position of all control rods (fully withdrawn rods are shown as blanks). 
• the neutron flux levels in the vicinity of all 124 LPRM detectors. 
• core average axial relative power at 6 inch intervals (Reference Figure 1.8-20). 
 Notice how power is bottom peaked 
• core average radial power distribution (Reference figure 1.8-21) 
 Notice how power peaks in rings 2, 4 and 6. 
 
1.8.10 Summary 
 
Thermal limits minimize the radiological release from the plant during normal operation, 
abnormal operation, abnormal operational transients, and postulated accidents by 
restricting plant operation so that the fuel cladding integrity is maintained.  Limits are 
imposed on LHGR and CPR to ensure fuel cladding integrity during normal and 
transient operation.  APLHGR is limited to meet ECCS criteria. 
 
LHGR limits are imposed to prevent fuel cladding perforation because of mechanical 
stress of the fuel pellets.  The LHGR limit is set to account for high local power peaking. 
 
CPR limits are imposed to prevent cladding perforation because of the OTB (breakdown 
of the heat transfer mechanism), and are modified to account for transients and flow 
conditions less than rated.  When outside of the bounds of the correlation normally used 
to calculate CPR, limits are imposed on core thermal power. 
 
APLHGR limits are imposed to restrict the amount of stored energy in the fuel, thus 
limiting the rate of cladding heatup on a LOCA.  Power and flow dependent corrections 
are applied to the rated conditions APLHGR to assure that the fuel thermal-mechanical 
design criteria are preserved during abnormal transients initiated from below rated 
conditions. 
 
The plant process computer provides monitoring capability and alarm functions to 
ensure adherence to the thermal limitations. 

Table 1.8-1 Comparison of BWR Core Parameters 
 

PARAMETER BWR/3 BWR/4 BWR/5 BWR/6 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-19 USNRC HRTD 

 (Dresden) (BFNPP) (NMP-2) (Perry) 

RATED POWER 
(MWT) 

2527 3293 3323 3579 

NUMBER OF FUEL 
ASSEMBLIES 

724 764 764 748 

NUMBER OF 
CONTROL RODS 

177 185 185 177 

VESSEL SIZE 251" 251" 251" 238" 

RATED CORE FLOW 
(LBS/HR) 

98 X 106 102.5 X 106 108.5 X 106 104 X 106 

RATED 
STEAM/FEEDWATER 
FLOW (LBS/HR) 

9.8 X 106 13.4 X 106 14.2 X 106 15.4 X 106 

AVERAGE POWER 
DENSITY (KW/LITER) 

36.6 50.7 50.0 54.1 

HEAT FLUX 
(WATTS/CM2) 

41.7 51.8 45.3 49.5 

HEAT FLUX 
(BTU/HR-FT2) 

132,314 164,410 143,740 159,500 

PEAK HEAT FLUX 
(BTU/HR-FT2) 

396,942 428,124 361,000 361,600 

AVG. THERMAL 
POWER/BUNDLE 
(MWT) 

3.49 4.31 4.35 4.78 

TOTAL HEAT 
TRANSFER AREA 
(FT2) 

62,928 66,214 74,871 73,409 

AVERAGE LHGR 
(KW/FT) 

5.72 7.05 5.33 5.90 

PEAK LHGR (KW/FT) 17.5 18.5 13.4 13.4 

DESIGN OR MAX. 
TOTAL PEAKING 
FACTOR (FUEL TYPE 
DEPENDENT) 

3.0 2.6 2.51 2.21 

HEAT TRANSFER 
AREA/FUEL ROD (FT2) 

1.768 1.768 1.581 1.592 

 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-20 USNRC HRTD 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-21 USNRC HRTD 

Table 1.8-2 GEXL Bounding Parameter Values 
 

Parameter Value 
 
Pressure: 
 
Mass Flux: 
 
Inlet Subcooling: 
 
Local Peaking: 
 
 
Axial Peaking: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rod Array: 

 
800 to 1400 psia 
 
0.1 to 1.25 106 lb/hr-ft2 
 
0 to 100 Btu/lb 
 
1.61 at a corner rod to 
1.47 at an interior rod 
 
Shape   Max./Avg. 
Uniform  1.0 
Outlet Peaked 1.60 
Inlet Peaked  1.60 
Double Peak  1.46 and 1.38 
Cosine  1.39 
 
 
64 rods in an 8x8 array, 
49 rods in a 7x7 array 

 
 



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-22 USNRC HRTD 

  



 
Rev 09/11 1.8-23 USNRC HRTD 

Table 1.8-3 Thermal Limits Calculations 
 

 
MFLCPR  =  Max Fraction Limiting Critical Power Ratio 
 
MFLCPR  =  MCPR Operating Limit 
   ------------------------------------- 
   MCPR Actual Critical Power 
       Actual Power 
 
 
 
MFLPD  =  Max Fraction of Limiting Power Density 
 
MFLPD  =   MRPD  Maximum LHGR (Actual) KW/ft 
   ---------- ------------------------------------------- 
   RPDLM LHGR Limit (13.4 KW/ft) 
 
 
 
 
MAPRAT  =  Max Fraction of Limiting Average Planar Linear 
       Heat Generation Rate 
 
MAPRAT = MAPLHGR (Actual Value of Average Planar LHGR) KW/ft 
     ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
     MAPLHGR Limits (from T.S.) KW/ft 

 
 
 



 Figure 1.8-1 Thermal Limits 

 
 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-2 Fuel Temperature Cross Section 

 
 
 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-3 Regions of Boiling Heat Transfer 

 
 

 
 
  



 Figure 1.8-4 Plot of Coolant and Fuel Bundle Temperature vs. Flow Path Length 

 



 Figure 1.8-5 Forced Convection Boiling Curve 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-6 Critical Power Ratio 

 
 

Boiling Length (L)

Tangent Point

1

2

3

X Versus L Corresponding to
Operating Bundle Power

X Versus L Corresponding to
Critical Bundle Power

X Versus L , GEXL,
Correlation Line

BC

 
 



 Figure 1.8-7 MCPR Limits 

 
 
Operating Limit
MCPR (~1.44)

MCPR Safety
Limit (~1.07)

MCPR=1.0

Steady State
Operation

99.9% RODS AVOID
BOILING TRANSITION

MEAN OF
ATLAS DATA

MARGIN FOR WORST-CASE
FUEL TRANSIENT

MARGIN FOR UNCERTAINTY IN
CORE OPERATING STATE

 
 



 Figure 1.8-8 MCPR Limit as Function of Average Scram Time 

 
 
 

TAU

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
1.24

1.25

1.26

1.27

1.28

1.29

1.30

1.31

1.32

1.33

1.34

GE9B-P8DWB314

GE7B

GE11-P9HUB293
Lead Bundles

 
 



 Figure 1.8-9 Power-Dependent MCPR Multiplier (KP) 

 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-10 Flow-Dependent MCPR Limits, MCPR (F) 

 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-11 Typical Stress Strain Curve for Ductile Metal 

 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-12 Fuel Power Versus Pellet/Clad Expansion 

 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-13 Average Planar Linear Heat Generation Rate Limit vs. Average Planar Exposure 

 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-14 MAPFACf 

 
 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-15 MAPFACp 

 
 

 
 



 Figure 1.8-16 Thermal Limits & Modification (BWR/3/4/5, without "ARTS") 

 
 

Radioactive Release
from the Plant within Limits

LCO Operating
MCPR * K

Fuel Cladding
Cracking Due
To High Stress

Fuel Pellet
Expansion

1% Plastic
Strain on
Cladding

Local Fuel
Pin Power
in Node

LHGR

CTP> 25%

LCO
LHGR<

13.4 KW/FT

RPS LSSS

TPF > DTPF
or

FLPD > FRP

Lowered
APRM Scram

& R.B. Setpoints

Gross Cladding
Failure Due to

Lack of Cooling

Decay Heat
and Stored Heat
Following LOCA

Cladding
Temperature

of 2200ºF

Average Fuel
Pin Power
in Node

APLHGR

CTP > 25%

LCO
MAPLHGR <
Table Limit

Administrative

Fuel Cladding
Cracking Due to
Lack of Cooling

Loss of Nucleate
Boiling Around

Cladding

Boiling
Transition

Total Fuel
Bundle Power

CPR

CTP > 25%
Press. >785 PSIG

WD >10%

Safety Limit
MCPR >1.07
(Reload Core)

RPS LSSS

MCPR for
Most Limiting

Transient

Core Flow
Rated

Administrative

Core Flow
< Rated

f

Administrative

Average Core
Thermal Power

CTP

Press < 785 PSIG
or

WD <10%

Safety Limit
CTP < 25%

RPS LSSS
(APRM Fixed 15% Scram)

Method to Prevent
Exceeding Limit

Modified Limit

Condition Requiring
Modification

Additional
Consideration

Additional T.S. Limits

Method to Prevent
Exceeding Limit

Tech. Spec.
Limitation

Applicable
Condition

Limiting
Parameter

Item
Measured

Limiting
Condition

Cause of
Failure

Failure
Mechanisim

Purpose

 
 



 Figure 1.8-17 Process Computer Simplified Block Diagram 

 



 Figure 1.8-18 LPRM Adaptive Monitor Case Output (Sample Output) 

PLANT NAME SEQUENCE NO 12
CORE PARAMETERS 3D MONICORE 7-JUL-1993 12:29 CALCULATED
POWER MWT 3563. PERIODIC LOG 7-JUL-1993 12:42 PRINTED
POWER MWE 1205. CASE ID FMLS1930707122950
FLOW MLB/HR 86.871 CALC RESULTS RESTART FRFS1930707120850
FPAPDR 0.909 LPRM ABSOLUTE - FULL CORE
SUBC BTU/LB 24.49 Keff 1.0000
PR PSIa 1034.3 XE WORTH % -2.48 LOAD LINE SUMMARY
CORE MWD/sT 17029.7 XE/RATED 1.01 CORE POWER 99.6%
CYCLE MWD/sT 5543.6 CORE FLOW 83.5%

LOAD LINE 111.6%
CORRECTION FACTOR: MFLCPR= 1.017 MFLPD= 1.000 MAPRAT= 0.998
OPTION: ARTS DUAL LOOP MANUAL FLOW MCPRLIM= 1.190

MOST LIMITING LOCATIONS (NON-SYMMETRIC)
MFLCPR LOC MFLPD LOC MAPRAT LOC PCRAT LOC

0.874 21-40 0.905 19-50- 4 0.892 41-12- 4 0.998 19-34-16
0.861 25-36 0.897 49-42- 5 0.889 51-22- 5 0.997 41-32-13
0.846 27-34 0.884 51-40- 5 0.887 49-42- 5 0.997 27-14-16
0.846 25-38 0.875 21-52- 4 0.878 51-44- 5 0.996 37-40-16
0.845 35-40 0.872 51-44- 5 0.878 21-10- 4 0.996 33-32-18
0.844 29-34 0.871 17-52- 5 0.871 17-10- 5 0.996 27-40-16
0.839 27-30 0.864 43-36- 5 0.863 43-26- 5 0.996 13-48-15
0.837 23-36 0.858 53-42- 5 0.852 51-26- 5 0.996 27-42-16
0.834 37-42 0.855 19-54- 4 0.849 43-44- 5 0.996 47-34-16
0.833 21-36 0.851 51-26- 5 0.837 39-40- 9 0.996 21-40-17

SEQ. A-2 C=MFLCPR D=MFLPD M=MAPRAT P=PCRAT *=MULTIPLE CORE AVE AXIAL
NOTCH REL PW LOC

0.197 25
00 0.436 24

59 02 0.672 23
L 04 0.839 22

55 12 06 0.921 21
51 D 08 0.946 20

L 10 0.991 19
47 32 08 38 08 32 12 1.005 18
43 14 1.037 17

L 16 1.098 16
39 08 C 34 08 34 08 18 1.129 15
35 P 20 1.136 14

L 22 1.174 13
31 12 38 08 36 08 38 12 24 1.210 12
27 26 1.211 11

L 28 1.220 10
23 08 34 08 34 08 30 1.253 09
19 32 1.254 08

L 34 1.228 07
15 32 08 38 08 32 36 1.248 06
11 M 38 1.246 05

L 40 1.202 04
07 12 42 1.098 03
03 L L L L L L L 44 0.845 02

02 06 10 14 18 22 26 30 34 38 42 46 50 54 58 46 0.406 01

CORE AVERAGE RADIAL POWER DISTRIBUTION
RING # 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
REL PW 1.011 1.251 1.162 1.212 1.106 1.149 1.014 0.652

PAGE 1



 Figure 1.8-19 LPRM Adaptive Monitor Case (continued) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PAGE 2
PLANT NAME INSTRUMENT READINGS/STATUS SEQUENCE NO 12

CALIBRATED LPRM READINGS 7-JUL-1993 12:29 CALCULATED
7-JUL-1993 12:42 PRINTED

57D 38.5 42.6 29.8 CASE ID FMLS1930707122950
C 47.9 43.4 41.6 LPRM ABSOLUTE - FULL CORE
B 51.5 44.3 46.0
A D 44.5 36.1 0.0

FAILED SENSORS:
49D 27.2 44.3 53.0 53.6 47.5 37.9 LPRM ( 2 SIGNAL FAILED)

C 42.9 66.3 63.5 65.5 60.2 58.8 3209C 4057A
B 49.1 72.4 67.8 69.5 67.4 66.2 LPRM ( 0 PANACEA REJECTED)
A 44.0 60.1 57.2 49.3 68.4 55.2 OTHER SENSORS ( 1 TOTAL)

41D 42.4 52.9C 57.9 57.0 55.4 47.7 30.8 2-CRD FDW TEMP (F)
C 60.7 65.2P 76.6 66.4 71.5 60.6 41.1 SUB RODS
B 69.2 70.5 79.4 68.5 76.8 67.6 44.9 NONE
A 70.1 60.9 58.0 51.9 58.1 66.7 40.5

T = TIP RUN RECOMMENDED
33D 50.8 56.7 58.4 57.4 54.9 52.8 41.5 C = MFLCPR LOCATION

C 58.2 73.1 69.5 73.3 64.2 66.0 42.0 M = MAPRAT LOCATION
B 63.6 78.6 71.4 75.5 67.8 69.7 43.1 D = MFLPD LOCATION
A 55.9 58.2 56.2 54.0 54.1 52.6 35.9 P = PCRAT LOCATION

* = MULTIPLE UNIT
25D 46.1 54.8 57.7 58.8 56.8 52.5 37.7

C 61.2 65.8 75.6 71.2 75.0 63.0 47.5
B 66.4 71.0 79.5 73.3 78.8 66.4 50.3
A 63.9 59.4 57.2 56.8 60.5 61.6 46.6

17D 36.0 47.4 54.7 57.6 51.9 44.8
C 57.0 67.0 65.7 73.4 64.8 67.0
B 66.2 73.1 70.6 77.4 69.3 72.9
A 67.3 61.1 58.6 54.8 62.4M 62.4

09D 36.3 46.6 51.2 42.2 26.7
C 57.2 61.1 0.0 61.0 41.4
B 67.1 66.2 62.2 68.9 47.1
A 67.4 64.6 53.5 71.0 44.0

08 16 24 32 40 48 56

CORE SUMMARY
CORE POWER 99.6% CALC SUB FLOW 84.1% DP MEAS PSI 15.51
CORE FLOW 83.5% OPER SUB FLOW -1.0% DPCALC PSI 20.20
LOAD LINE 111.6% FLOW BASIS MEAS FEEDWTR FLOW MLB/HR 15.35

APRM CALIBRATION
A B C D E F G H

READING 99.1 99.4 99.6 99.5 99.5 99.5 99.3 99.0
AGAF 1.005 1.001 1.000 1.001 1.000 1.001 1.003 1.006

TIP RUNS RECOMMENDED
STRINGS: NONE



 Figure 1.8-20 Core Axial Array Definition 

 
 
 
 
 
 

12 ft

BAF

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

CORE TOP

DISCS

 
 
 
 
 
 



 Figure 1.8-21 Core Ring Array Definition 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0°

90°

00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13

01 03 05 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51

01

03

05

07

09

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

25

27

29

31

33

35

37

39

41

43

45

47

49

51

53

02

04

06

08

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

36

38

40

42

44

46

48

50

52

1

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

5

6

6

7

7

8

8

9

9

10

10

11

11

12

12

13

13

14

JR JL JY

1

2

RING 3

RING 4

RING 5

RING 6

RING 7

 
 



<<
  /ASCII85EncodePages false
  /AllowTransparency false
  /AutoPositionEPSFiles true
  /AutoRotatePages /PageByPage
  /Binding /Left
  /CalGrayProfile (None)
  /CalRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CalCMYKProfile (U.S. Web Coated \050SWOP\051 v2)
  /sRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CannotEmbedFontPolicy /Warning
  /CompatibilityLevel 1.4
  /CompressObjects /Tags
  /CompressPages true
  /ConvertImagesToIndexed true
  /PassThroughJPEGImages true
  /CreateJDFFile false
  /CreateJobTicket true
  /DefaultRenderingIntent /Default
  /DetectBlends true
  /DetectCurves 0.1000
  /ColorConversionStrategy /UseDeviceIndependentColor
  /DoThumbnails false
  /EmbedAllFonts true
  /EmbedOpenType false
  /ParseICCProfilesInComments true
  /EmbedJobOptions true
  /DSCReportingLevel 0
  /EmitDSCWarnings false
  /EndPage -1
  /ImageMemory 1048576
  /LockDistillerParams false
  /MaxSubsetPct 100
  /Optimize true
  /OPM 1
  /ParseDSCComments true
  /ParseDSCCommentsForDocInfo true
  /PreserveCopyPage true
  /PreserveDICMYKValues true
  /PreserveEPSInfo true
  /PreserveFlatness true
  /PreserveHalftoneInfo false
  /PreserveOPIComments true
  /PreserveOverprintSettings true
  /StartPage 1
  /SubsetFonts true
  /TransferFunctionInfo /Preserve
  /UCRandBGInfo /Preserve
  /UsePrologue false
  /ColorSettingsFile ()
  /AlwaysEmbed [ true
  ]
  /NeverEmbed [ true
  ]
  /AntiAliasColorImages false
  /CropColorImages true
  /ColorImageMinResolution 150
  /ColorImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleColorImages false
  /ColorImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /ColorImageResolution 150
  /ColorImageDepth 8
  /ColorImageMinDownsampleDepth 1
  /ColorImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeColorImages true
  /ColorImageFilter /FlateEncode
  /AutoFilterColorImages false
  /ColorImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /ColorACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.76
    /HSamples [2 1 1 2] /VSamples [2 1 1 2]
  >>
  /ColorImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.76
    /HSamples [2 1 1 2] /VSamples [2 1 1 2]
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 15
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 15
  >>
  /AntiAliasGrayImages false
  /CropGrayImages true
  /GrayImageMinResolution 150
  /GrayImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleGrayImages false
  /GrayImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /GrayImageResolution 150
  /GrayImageDepth 8
  /GrayImageMinDownsampleDepth 2
  /GrayImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeGrayImages true
  /GrayImageFilter /FlateEncode
  /AutoFilterGrayImages false
  /GrayImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /GrayACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.76
    /HSamples [2 1 1 2] /VSamples [2 1 1 2]
  >>
  /GrayImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.76
    /HSamples [2 1 1 2] /VSamples [2 1 1 2]
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 15
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 15
  >>
  /AntiAliasMonoImages false
  /CropMonoImages true
  /MonoImageMinResolution 1200
  /MonoImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleMonoImages false
  /MonoImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /MonoImageResolution 1200
  /MonoImageDepth -1
  /MonoImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeMonoImages false
  /MonoImageFilter /CCITTFaxEncode
  /MonoImageDict <<
    /K -1
  >>
  /AllowPSXObjects false
  /CheckCompliance [
    /None
  ]
  /PDFX1aCheck false
  /PDFX3Check false
  /PDFXCompliantPDFOnly false
  /PDFXNoTrimBoxError true
  /PDFXTrimBoxToMediaBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXSetBleedBoxToMediaBox true
  /PDFXBleedBoxToTrimBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXOutputIntentProfile (None)
  /PDFXOutputConditionIdentifier ()
  /PDFXOutputCondition ()
  /PDFXRegistryName ()
  /PDFXTrapped /False

  /Description <<
    /CHS <FEFF4f7f75288fd94e9b8bbe5b9a521b5efa7684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065876863900275284e8e55464e1a65876863768467e5770b548c62535370300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c676562535f00521b5efa768400200050004400460020658768633002>
    /CHT <FEFF4f7f752890194e9b8a2d7f6e5efa7acb7684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065874ef69069752865bc666e901a554652d965874ef6768467e5770b548c52175370300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c4f86958b555f5df25efa7acb76840020005000440046002065874ef63002>
    /DAN <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>
    /DEU <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>
    /ESP <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>
    /FRA <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>
    /ITA (Utilizzare queste impostazioni per creare documenti Adobe PDF adatti per visualizzare e stampare documenti aziendali in modo affidabile. I documenti PDF creati possono essere aperti con Acrobat e Adobe Reader 5.0 e versioni successive.)
    /JPN <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>
    /KOR <FEFFc7740020c124c815c7440020c0acc6a9d558c5ec0020be44c988b2c8c2a40020bb38c11cb97c0020c548c815c801c73cb85c0020bcf4ace00020c778c1c4d558b2940020b3700020ac00c7a50020c801d569d55c002000410064006f0062006500200050004400460020bb38c11cb97c0020c791c131d569b2c8b2e4002e0020c774b807ac8c0020c791c131b41c00200050004400460020bb38c11cb2940020004100630072006f0062006100740020bc0f002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020c774c0c1c5d0c11c0020c5f40020c2180020c788c2b5b2c8b2e4002e>
    /NLD (Gebruik deze instellingen om Adobe PDF-documenten te maken waarmee zakelijke documenten betrouwbaar kunnen worden weergegeven en afgedrukt. De gemaakte PDF-documenten kunnen worden geopend met Acrobat en Adobe Reader 5.0 en hoger.)
    /NOR <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>
    /PTB <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>
    /SUO <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>
    /SVE <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>
    /ENU (Use these settings to create Adobe PDF documents suitable for reliable viewing and printing of business documents.  Created PDF documents can be opened with Acrobat and Adobe Reader 5.0 and later.)
  >>
>> setdistillerparams
<<
  /HWResolution [300 300]
  /PageSize [612.000 792.000]
>> setpagedevice


