==============================================================================
NRC HRTD  General Electric BWR/4 Technology Manual (R-304B)
2.1 Reactor Vessel System  —  0518 - R304B - GE BWR_4 Technology - 2.1 Reactor Vessel System.
ADAMS ML11271A022   문서일자 2011-09-23   46 쪽   종류 본문
원본 https://www.nrc.gov/docs/ML1127/ML11271A022.pdf
이 파일은 manual/fetch_r304b.py 가 ADAMS 검색 API 에서 받은
NRC 추출 텍스트다. 손으로 고치지 않는다 — 다시 받으면 덮어쓴다.
==============================================================================


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

General Electric Systems Technology Manual 
 

Chapter 2.1 
 

Reactor Vessel System 
 





 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-i USNRC HRTD 

 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

2.1 REACTOR VESSEL SYSTEM ................................................................................. 1 

2.1.1 Introduction ....................................................................................................... 2 

2.1.2 System Description ........................................................................................... 2 

2.1.3 Component Description ..................................................................................... 3 
2.1.3.1 The Reactor Vessel .................................................................................... 3 
2.1.3.2 Annulus Region Components .................................................................... 4 
2.1.3.3 Lower Plenum Region ................................................................................ 6 
2.1.3.4 Core Shroud Region Components ............................................................. 9 
2.1.3.5 Moisture/Steam Separation ...................................................................... 12 
2.1.3.6 Main Steam Outlet Penetrations .............................................................. 13 
2.1.3.7 Vessel Head Penetrations ........................................................................ 13 
2.1.3.8 Vessel External Components ................................................................... 14 

2.1.4 System Features and Interfaces ..................................................................... 15 
2.1.4.1 System Features ...................................................................................... 15 
2.1.4.2 System Interfaces .................................................................................... 18 

2.1.5 Summary ......................................................................................................... 20 
 
  



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-ii USNRC HRTD 

 
 

LIST OF FIGURES 
 
2.1-1 Reactor Vessel Cutaway 
2.1-2 Reactor Vessel Cutaway 
2.1-3 Typical Feedwater Sparger 
2.1-4 Jet Pump Assembly 
2.1-5 Differential Pressure and Standby Liquid Control Line 
2.1-6 Control Rod Guide Tube to Control Rod Drive Housing Attachment 
2.1-7 Core Shroud 
2.1-8 Core Plate 
2.1-9 Fuel Cell Arrangement 
2.1-10 Fuel Support Pieces 
2.1-11 Core Spray Piping In Vessel 
2.1-12 Shroud Head and Steam Separator Assembly 
2.1-13 Steam Dryer Assembly 
2.1-14 Vessel Support and Biological Shield Wall 
2.1-15 Reactor Vessel Lateral Support 
2.1-16 Reactor Vessel Closure Assembly 
2.1-17 Reactor Vessel Insulation 
2.1-18 Control Rod Drive Housing Support 
2.1-19 Reactor Vessel Flow Path 
2.1-20 Core Flooding Capability of Recirculation System 
2.1-21 Standby Liquid Control Sparger Layout 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-1 USNRC HRTD 

2.1 REACTOR VESSEL SYSTEM 
 
Learning Objectives: 
 
1. Recognize the purposes of the reactor vessel system. 

 
2. Recognize the purpose of each the following major reactor vessel components: 

a. Jet pumps 
b. Control rod guide tubes 
c. Fuel support pieces and orifices 
d. Fuel assemblies 
e. Steam separator assembly 
f. Dryer assembly 
g. Main steam line penetrations 
h. Feedwater spargers 
i. Core shroud  

 
3. Recognize the flow path order of the following reactor vessel components: 

a. Jet pumps 
b. Control rod guide tubes 
c. Fuel support pieces and orifices 
d. Fuel assemblies 
e. Steam separator assembly 
f. Dryer assembly 
g. Main steam line penetrations 
h. Feedwater spargers  

 
4. Identify whether the flow through each of the following components is water, steam 

or a mixture of both. 
a. Jet pumps 
b. Control rod guide tubes 
c. Fuel support pieces and orifices 
d. Fuel assemblies 
e. Steam separator assembly 
f. Dryer assembly 
g. Main steam line penetrations 
h. Feedwater spargers 

 
5. Recognize the reactor vessel components that are significant to ⅔ core coverage 

following a Loss Of Coolant Accident (LOCA). 
 

6. Recognize how the reactor vessel system interrelates with the following systems: 
a. Fuel and Control Rods System (Section 2.3) 
b. Control Rod Drive System (Section 2.3) 
c. Recirculation System  (Section 2.4) 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-2 USNRC HRTD 

d. Main Steam System (Section 2.5) 
e. Condensate and Feedwater System (Section 2.6) 
f. Reactor Water Cleanup System (Section 2.8) 
g. Reactor Vessel Instrumentation System (Section 3.1) 
h. Neutron Monitoring Systems (Section 5) 
i. Standby Liquid Control System (Section 7.4) 
j. Core Spray System (Section 10.3) 
k. Residual Heat Removal System (Section 10.4) 

 
2.1.1 Introduction 
 
The purposes of the reactor vessel system are: 
1. To house the reactor core. 
2. To support and align the fuel and control rods. 
3. To provide a flow path for the circulation of coolant past the fuel. 
4. To remove moisture from the steam exiting the reactor vessel.  
5. To provide an internal, refloodable volume to assure core cooling capability following 

a loss of coolant accident. 
6. To serve as part of the reactor coolant boundary. 
7. To limit downward control rod motion following a postulated failure of a control rod 

drive housing. 
 
The functional classification of the Reactor Vessel System is that of a safety related 
system.  It also contains a component, the control rod drive housing support structure, 
which is an engineered safety feature. 
 
2.1.2 System Description 
 
The Reactor Pressure Vessel (RPV) assembly, shown in Figure 2.1-1, consists of the 
reactor vessel and its internal components including the core support structures, core 
shroud, steam separator assembly, steam dryer assembly, and jet pumps. 
 
The reactor vessel system produces and supplies steam via four steam lines, for the 
operation of the main turbine and other plant auxiliary systems and components.  The 
reactor vessel receives feedwater from the outlet of feedwater heaters and directs it 
through an internal flow path. 
 
The RPV consists of a cylindrical shell with an integral hemispherical bottom head.  The 
top head is also hemispherical in shape, but is removable to facilitate refueling 
operations.  The lines that penetrate the reactor vessel and the vessel internal 
structures are discussed in later paragraphs of this section. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-3 USNRC HRTD 
 

2.1.3 Component Description 
 
The major components of the RPV are best discussed when divided into several 
different categories: 
1. The reactor vessel. 
2. The annulus region components. 
3. The lower plenum region components. 
4. The core region components. 
5. The above core region components. 
6. The components external to the reactor vessel. 
 
2.1.3.1 The Reactor Vessel 
 
The reactor vessel (Figures 2.1-1 and 2.1-2) is mounted vertically within the drywell and 
consists of a cylindrical pressure vessel of welded construction.  The vessel is 
fabricated from a number of 3 to 7 inch thick manganese-molybdenum alloy steel 
plates.  The vessel is designed, fabricated, tested, inspected, and stamped in 
accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers codes.  The hemispherical 
top and bottom heads are fabricated to the same standards as the vessel shell. 
 
The vessel shell and bottom head sections are clad with a 7/32" AISI Type 304 stainless 
steel weld overlay on the interior.  The cladding is used to minimize corrosion which 
could adversely affect water clarity during refueling operations.  The internal surface of 
the vessel head and the nozzle and nozzle weld zones are unclad except for those 
nozzles that mate to stainless steel piping systems. 
 
The overall height of the reactor vessel is 70 feet with an inside diameter of 218 inches.  
Vertical measurements are referenced to the vessel zero which is defined as the inside 
of the bottom head at the lowest point internal to the vessel. 
 
The head and vessel flanges are fabricated from tempered nickel-chrome-moly ring 
forgings to provide the critical structural rigidity necessary for bolting the head to the 
vessel.  The vessel head flange is attached to the vessel shell flange with 52 studs, 
nuts, and washers.  The 6 inch diameter studs are 48" long, thread into the vessel 
flange and extend through the vessel head flange.  Castellated nuts are threaded onto 
the studs. The weight of the assembled reactor vessel is 505 tons, 72 tons of which are 
the closure head (including studs, nuts and washers).   
 
Two concentric 5/8" O-rings (Figure 2.1-16) are used to ensure a tight seal between the 
vessel head and the shell flange.  The O-rings are made of silver plated inconel and are 
held in place with brackets which screw into two grooves machined into the underside of 
the vessel head flange.  Any possible coolant leakage between the two O-rings is 
monitored by a leak detection system (Section 3.1). 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-4 USNRC HRTD 

2.1.3.2 Annulus Region Components 
 
The reactor vessel annulus region is the area inside the reactor vessel wall, outside the 
core shroud, and above the baffle plate.  The components in this area are discussed in 
the paragraphs which follow (Figures 2.1-1, 2, 4, 5, 7, & 9). 
 
2.1.3.2.1 Feedwater Spargers 
 
The reactor vessel is supplied with feedwater via four feedwater spargers (Figure 2.1-3) 
located in the mixing section above the downcomer annulus at an elevation of 483½ 
inches.  Feedwater flow enters the center of the spargers and is discharged radially 
inward toward the vessel to mix the cooler feedwater with the downcomer flow from the 
steam separators.  End brackets attached to the vessel support the spargers, with jack 
bolts positioning the spargers away from the vessel wall.  Each sparger is fitted to a 
vessel nozzle penetration and constructed to conform to the curvature of the vessel 
wall. 
 
Each feedwater sparger consists of a thermal sleeve, a distribution header spanning 
70º, and converging discharge nozzles.  The thermal sleeve section is an essential part 
of the sparger which projects into the vessel nozzle bore.  The thermal sleeve is 
intended to prevent the impingement of cold feedwater on the hot nozzle surface, thus 
minimizing the potential for crack formation and propagation.  The distribution header is 
the central section of the feedwater sparger that directs the feedwater flow from the 
thermal sleeve to the converging discharge nozzles. 
 
The converging discharge nozzles are welded to the top of the distribution header to 
ensure the thermal sleeve and distribution header remain full of water during all modes 
of reactor operation.  The nozzles direct feedwater from the distribution header radially 
upward and inward.  The relatively cool feedwater (~420°F) in the downcomer annulus 
region, sub cools the water flowing to the recirculation pumps' suctions and to the jet 
pumps to ensure adequate net positive suction head for these pumps. 
 
2.1.3.2.2 Surveillance Sample Holders 
 
Three surveillance capsule baskets are located on the RPV inner wall around the 
periphery of the core at the core midplane.  Their purpose is to permit monitoring of 
exposure and material properties of both tensile and impact specimens for evaluating 
radiation-induced changes in vessel and structural properties.  The sample specimens 
are contained in specimen capsules which in turn are vertically contained in baskets 
suspended by holders mounted at 30, 120 and 270 degree azimuths.  The surveillance 
baskets are installed in the reactor prior to initial startup, and removed permanently after 
exposure intervals varying from 1 to 32 years.  The impact test specimens are used for 
checking shifts in the nil-ductility transition temperature.  Tensile specimens are used for 
monitoring shifts in tensile properties. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-5 USNRC HRTD 
 

A fourth basket contains a neutron dosimeter and is removed after one year of 
operation.  The neutron dosimeter consists of iron, nickel, and copper wires.  These will 
determine the radiation exposure received by the test specimens and hence the RPV. 
 
2.1.3.2.3 Recirculation Suction Penetrations 
 
Two recirculation suction lines penetrate the reactor vessel at the 161.5 inch level.  
These 28 inch diameter lines provide water from the vessel annulus region to the 
suction of the recirculation pumps. 
 
2.1.3.2.4 Recirculation Discharge Penetrations 
 
The ten recirculation inlet penetrations are twelve inches in diameter each and route 
water from the recirculation pump discharge to the inlet driving nozzles of the jet pumps.  
The inlet penetrations are located at the 178.5 inch elevation.  The jet pumps provide 
forced flow of the coolant/moderator through the reactor core. 
 
2.1.3.2.5 Jet Pump Assemblies 
 
The jet pump assemblies are installed in two semicircular groups of five jet pump 
assemblies in the downcomer annulus (Figure 2.1-4).  Each assembly is composed of 
one inlet riser and two jet pumps.  The assembly contains no moving parts.  Each jet 
pump consists of an inlet mixer subassembly, and diffuser.  The diffuser section is 
welded in position, while the inlet mixer subassembly is removable.  The inlet mixer 
subassembly consists of a 180-degree return bend nozzle assembly ("rams head"), jet 
pump nozzle, suction inlet, and throat section.  The inlet mixer subassembly is 
removable and is clamped to the top of the riser by a beam-bolt locking device.  The 
inlet mixer subassembly's throat section has a slip fit with the diffuser.  The diffusers 
and riser are integrally welded to the vessel shell.  The jet pumps are provided to 
increase the total flow of water through the core while minimizing the flow external to the 
reactor vessel (Recirculation System, Section 2.4).  Inlet riser pipes are used for each 
jet pump assembly to permit lowering the reactor recirculation inlet nozzles to below that 
of the active fuel region.  This prevents any significant fast neutron exposure which 
could adversely change the mechanical properties of the nozzle penetrations and 
welds.  Riser pipe brace arms provide lateral support for the upper end of the riser and 
allow vertical differential expansion between the riser and the reactor vessel during 
heatup or cooldown operations. 
 
The mixing assemblies are braced to the inlet riser pipe just above the slip fit into the 
diffuser.  The brace ring is welded to the riser and holds the mixing assembly in place 
with a sliding, tapered wedge and restrainer assembly. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-6 USNRC HRTD 

The jet pump diffusers are welded to adapters which are first welded to the shroud 
support plate.  Welding the smaller adapter to the shroud support plate first, aids in the 
alignment and welding of the diffusers. 
 
Each jet pump is equipped with a pressure tap, located where the diffuser section is 
joined to the mixing section.  Four jet pumps, two per group, have an additional 
pressure tap towards the end of the diffuser.  These jet pumps, number JP5, JP10, 
JP15, and JP20 are called the calibrated jet pumps.  The instrument piping from the 
twenty four pressure taps are routed through the two jet pump instrument nozzles of the 
RPV. 
 
2.1.3.2.6 Baffle Plate 
 
The baffle plate shown in Figure 2.1-7, is a circular plate welded to the vessel wall. This 
support is designed to carry the weight of the shroud, shroud head, peripheral fuel 
elements, neutron sources, core plate, top guide, the steam separators and the jet 
pump diffusers.  The baffle plate via the top guide and core plate also provides lateral 
support to the control rods, control rod guide tubes and the fuel assemblies.  The baffle 
plate is sometimes referred to as the shroud support plate or the diffuser seal ring.  The 
baffle plate is supported underneath by column members welded to the vessel bottom 
head.  Besides supporting the core shroud, the baffle plate also separates the annulus 
(reactor recirculation pump suction area) from the lower plenum (jet pump discharge) 
region. 
 
2.1.3.3 Lower Plenum Region 
 
The lower plenum region is the area inside the reactor vessel lower head, below the 
baffle plate, and below the core plate.  The components in this region are discussed in 
the paragraphs which follow.  The reactor vessel lower plenum region is illustrated in 
Figure 2.1-5. 
 
2.1.3.3.1 Bottom Head Penetrations 
 
The reactor vessel bottom head, which is welded to the vessel shell, contains numerous 
penetrations which consist of: 
1. A penetration for each control rod drive mechanism, 137 total. 
2. A penetration for the bottom head drain to the Reactor Water CleanUp System 

(RWCU). 
3. A penetration for injection of the Standby Liquid Control (SLC) System. 
4. A penetration for each Local Power Range Monitoring (LPRM) detector string, 31 

total. 
5. A penetration for each Intermediate Range Monitoring (IRM) detector, 8 total. 
6. A penetration for each Source Range Monitoring (SRM) detector, 4 total. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-7 USNRC HRTD 
 

2.1.3.3.2 Bottom Head Drain 
 
The bottom head drain line penetration (Fig. 2.1-19) directs flow to the RWCU, Section 
2.8, to aid in the removal of suspended solids, provide a temperature measurement of 
water in the bottom head area, and to minimize cold water stratification in the bottom 
head area. 
 
2.1.3.3.3 Standby Liquid Control Line 
 
The SLC line (Fig 2.1-21) serves a dual function within the reactor vessel: 
1. to inject liquid control solution into the coolant stream, 
2. and to sense the differential pressure across the core plate. 
 
The line enters the reactor vessel at a point below the core plate as two concentric 
pipes.  In the lower plenum, the two pipes separate.  The inner pipe terminates inside 
the lower shroud with a perforated length below the core plate.  It is used to sense the 
pressure below the core plate during normal operation and to provide an injection point 
for the liquid boron solution when required (SLC, Section 7.4).  This location assures 
that good mixing and dispersion are facilitated.  The use of the inner pipe also reduces 
the thermal shock to the vessel nozzle should SLC be actuated.  The outer pipe 
terminates immediately above the core plate and senses the pressure in the region 
outside the fuel assembly channels. 
 
2.1.3.3.4 Control Rod Drive Housing 
 
The Control Rod Drive (CRD) housings, shown in Figure 2.1-6, are extensions of the 
reactor vessel bottom head pressure boundary. The CRD housings are 14 feet in length 
and have the insert and withdrawal hydraulic lines welded to their lower flange.  CRD 
housings provide vertical and lateral support for the CRD mechanisms (CRD, Section 
2.3).  Each CRD housing also transmits the weight of its four fuel assemblies, fuel 
support piece, CRD guide tube, CRD mechanism, and control rod blade to the reactor 
vessel bottom head.  During construction, the CRD housings are inserted from the 
bottom of the vessel through the CRD stub tubes.  Once inserted, the CRD housings 
are optically aligned through their respective core plate opening and welded to the stub 
tube.  Following the installation of a CRD housing the CRD hydraulic insert and 
withdraw lines are permanently attached. 
 
Located in the flange end of the CRD housing has a keyway which is used for locking 
the CRD thermal sleeve in place to prevent it from rotating.  The thermal sleeve 
provides a bayonet lock type coupling device for the control rod guide tube. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-8 USNRC HRTD 

2.1.3.3.5 Control Rod Guide Tubes 
 
Each control rod guide tube (Figure 2.1-6) is 11 inches in diameter and slightly over 13 
feet in length.  The top portion contains four 3 inch diameter holes to direct flow from the 
below core plate area up through the fuel assemblies.  Lined up within these four holes 
are the flow orifices of the fuel support pieces.  The bottom end of the guide tube is 
machined to mate with the CRD housing and is locked in place on top of the housing via 
its bayonet fitting to the CRD thermal sleeve. 
 
The guide tube performs the following functions: 
1. It guides the lower end of the control rod during rod movement. 
2. It forms a cylinder around the velocity limiter portion of the control rod so it can 

retard the free fall velocity of the control rod during a rod drop accident (Sections 2.2 
and 7.5). 

3. It supports the orifice fuel support piece which in turn vertically supports the fuel. 
4. It provides the coolant flow passage into the orifice fuel support piece. 
 
During construction, the control rod guide tube is lowered through the core plate from 
the top of the reactor vessel.  There are two lugs at the top of the guide tube.  One lug is 
an alignment lug that is aligned with a pin on the core plate.  This facilitates proper 
alignment with the fuel support piece.  After the guide tube is set on its CRD housing, 
the CRD thermal sleeve is inserted upward into the CRD housing from below the 
reactor vessel, engaged with the guide tube, and rotated to lock the guide tube in place 
with the bayonet coupling.  A locking key is then inserted into the keyway in the lower 
end of the CRD housing and also in the thermal sleeve preventing it from rotating and 
releasing the guide tube. 
 
2.1.3.3.6 Nuclear Instrumentation Incore Housings 
 
The nuclear instrumentation's incore housings (Figures 2.1-1, 5 & 9) are welded 
extensions of the reactor vessel bottom head pressure boundary which provide for 
mounting of the incore nuclear instrumentation assemblies (SRMs, IRMs, and LPRMs).  
The housings are welded to the reactor vessel bottom head and extend upward to the 
core plate.  The housings prevent jet pump flow (core flow) impingement on the nuclear 
instrumentation assemblies in the below core plate area.  This eliminates possible 
vibration damage to the nuclear instrument assemblies. 
 
The housings are fabricated of stainless steel and are approximately 2 inches in 
diameter.  During construction, the housings are inserted in from the bottom of the 
vessel, aligned with their respective opening in the core plate, and welded directly to the 
reactor vessel bottom head, Figure 2.1-5.  They extend upward and terminate in a slip 
fit in the core plate approximately ½" below the top surface of the core plate..  All the 
incore housings are at approximately the same elevation after welding.  Cross bracing is 
installed below the core plate which ties all the tubes together.  This bracing is to 
eliminate vibration of the nuclear instrumentation assemblies.  Each tube is perforated 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-9 USNRC HRTD 
 

at the lower end by 4 holes to provide a cooling water path for the nuclear 
instrumentation assemblies.  These nuclear instrumentation assemblies are loaded into 
the tubes from the top of the vessel.  The nuclear instrument assemblies extend upward 
and are secured in notches on the under side of the top guide, Figure 2.1-9. 
 
2.1.3.4 Core Shroud Region Components 
 
The core shroud region is bounded at the bottom by the core plate, at the top by the 
shroud head, and circumferentially by the core shroud.  The components of this region 
are discussed in the paragraphs which follow. 
 
2.1.3.4.1 Core Shroud 
 
The core shroud, shown in Figure 2.1-7, is a two inch thick, cylindrical stainless steel 
assembly which surrounds the core.  The shroud provides the following: 
1. A barrier to separate or divide the upward core flow from the downward flow in the 

downcomer/annulus region. 
2. A vertical and lateral support for the core plate, top guide and shroud head. 
3. A floodable volume in the event of a Loss Of Coolant Accident (LOCA). 
4. A mounting surface for the core spray spargers (Core Spray, Section 10.3). 
5. A core discharge plenum, directing the steam water mixture into the steam separator 

assembly. 
 
The core shroud is welded to and supported by the shroud support plate (baffle plate).  
The upper surface is machined to provide a leak tight fit with the mating surface of the 
shroud head.  Mounted inside the upper shroud, in the space between the top guide 
and the shroud head base, are the core spray spargers. 
 
2.1.3.4.2 Core Plate 
 
The core plate (Figure 2.1-4, 5, 7 & 8) consists of a circular, horizontal stainless steel 
plate with vertical stiffener members below the horizontal plate.  Tie rods serve to cross 
brace the stiffener members.  The core plate contains the following: 
1. 137 holes to accommodate the control rod guide tubes 
2. 137 alignment pins to ensure proper guide tube and fuel support piece orientation 
3. 12 holes for peripheral fuel support pieces 
4. 43 incore guide tube holes for neutron instrumentation  
5. 5 neutron source location holes. 
 
The core plate acts as a partition to force the majority of the core flow into the control 
rod guide tubes, fuel support pieces and up through the fuel assemblies.  The core plate 
also provides vertical support for the 12 peripheral fuel assemblies via their peripheral 
fuel support pieces.  It provides lateral support for all of the orificed fuel support pieces, 
peripheral fuel support pieces, nuclear instrumentation, and neutron sources. 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-10 USNRC HRTD 

 
The core plate assembly is bolted to a ledge in the bottom area of the core shroud.  
Alignment pins on the core plate engage slots in the shroud to correctly position the 
assembly before it is secured. 
 
2.1.3.4.3 Top Guide 
 
The top guide (Figures 2.1-7 & 9) is set on a ledge near the top end of the shroud and is 
bolted in place.  The top guide is formed by a series of stainless steel plates joined at 
right angles to form a matrix of square openings.  Each central opening accommodates 
four fuel assemblies and one control rod (this is defined as a control cell).  Along the 
periphery are smaller openings which accommodate the 12 peripheral fuel assemblies.  
Cutouts are provided on the bottom edge of the top guide at the junction of the cross 
plates to support the top end of the neutron instrument assemblies and neutron source 
holders. 
 
The top guide provides lateral support for the upper end of all fuel assemblies, neutron 
monitoring instrument assemblies, and the installed neutron sources. 
 
2.1.3.4.4 Orificed (Standard) Fuel Support Pieces 
 
The orificed fuel support pieces (Figure 2.1-10) are four lobe stainless steel castings 
that support four fuel assemblies each.  They are provided with orifice plates to assure 
proper coolant flow distribution to each fuel assembly.  The fuel support pieces rest on 
top of the control rod guide tubes and are aligned with the same alignment pin used by 
the guide tube.  Usage of the same alignment pin ensures that the orifices in the fuel 
support piece are lined up with the openings in the control rod guide tubes.  The crucifix 
opening between the four lobes allows passage of the control rod blade. 
 
The fuel support piece provides lateral alignment for the bottom end of its four fuel 
assemblies and transmits the weight of the fuel assemblies to the control rod guide 
tube.  It also controls the amount of flow, via orifices (subsection 2.1.4.1.3), to each fuel 
assembly. 
 
2.1.3.4.5 Peripheral Fuel Support Pieces 
 
The peripheral fuel support pieces (Figure 2.1-10) are located at the outer edge of the 
core and are used to support fuel assemblies not part of a control cell (not located 
adjacent to a control rod).  Each peripheral fuel support piece supports one of the 12 
peripheral fuel assemblies.  Each peripheral fuel support piece incorporates a single 
orifice assembly which is designed to ensure proper coolant flow through the peripheral 
fuel bundle.  The peripheral support pieces are welded to the core plate and are not 
removable.  However, the flow orifice is spring loaded in the orifice assembly which can 
be removed during a refueling outage. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-11 USNRC HRTD 
 

2.1.3.4.6 Fuel Assemblies 
 
The fuel assemblies (Figure 2.1-9) occupy most of the core region.  The majority of the 
fuel assemblies (548) rest in the orificed fuel support pieces.  The other 12 fuel 
assemblies rest in the peripheral fuel support pieces.  The fuel assemblies contain 
uranium dioxide fuel pellets surrounded by zircalloy cladding (tubes).  The fuel 
assemblies are the heat source of the plant and are discussed in detail in Fuel and 
Control Rods System (Section 2.2). 
 
2.1.3.4.7 Control Rods 
 
The control rods (Figure 2.1-9) partially occupy space in the core region even when fully 
withdrawn.  The 137 control rods enter the core from the bottom and consist of 
cruciform shaped blades which contain vertical neutron absorber rods along with solid 
plates of Hafnium (Hf).  The neutron absorber rods contain boron (5B

10) in B4C powder 
form.  The control rods are used to control the nuclear reaction in the core and are 
discussed in detail in Fuel and Control Rods System (Section 2.2). 
 
2.1.3.4.8 Core Spray Line and Spargers 
 
The two core spray lines (Figure 2.1-11) penetrate the reactor vessel at an elevation of 
474 inches above vessel zero and 180° apart.  Once inside the reactor vessel, each line 
tees and is routed 90° horizontally.  The lines are directed downward along the vessel 
wall in the annulus region and then in to penetrate the upper core shroud just below the 
shroud head flange.  After penetrating the shroud, each line again tees and proceeds 
around the interior of the shroud in two semicircular headers providing a full 360° of 
spray coverage. 
 
Forty six spray nozzles are attached to each core spray header and adjusted to provide 
the correct spray distribution to all of the fuel assemblies.  Routing of the header and 
supports is designed to accommodate thermal expansion and differential movement 
between the core spray line, the core shroud and the reactor vessel. 
 
2.1.3.4.9 Shroud Head 
 
The shroud head (Figure 2.1-12) is hemispherical in shape with a flanged lower section.  
The top of the shroud head contains the penetrations used to channel the steam/water 
mixture exiting the core to the welded steam separator standpipes.  The periphery of the 
shroud head contains an array of bolts used to attach the shroud head to the upper 
edge of the shroud. 
 
Installation of the shroud head and the integral steam separator assemblies is 
accomplished with the aid of two guide rods 180° apart.  The upper end of the guide 
rods are secured to the reactor vessel wall and the lower end secured to the upper edge 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-12 USNRC HRTD 

of the shroud.  The guide rods provide a method for guiding the shroud head into place 
during installation via two slotted guide brackets in the shroud head assembly.  As the 
shroud head mates with the shroud, two alignment pins on the head fit into matching 
holes of the top of the shroud to provide exact alignment between the two components.  
Following installation, the shroud head is bolted to the top of the upper shroud to form 
the core outlet plenum. 
 
2.1.3.5 Moisture/Steam Separation 
 
Moisture or steam separation is accomplished internal to the reactor vessel via a steam 
separators and steam dryers.  The steam separating components are discussed in the 
paragraphs which follow. 
 
2.1.3.5.1 Steam Separator Assembly 
 
The steam separator assembly (Figure 2.1-12) increases the steam quality from the 10 
to 13% at the core exit to > 90% prior to entry into the steam dryers.  The separator 
assembly consists of 225 cyclone type separator assemblies. 
 
The standpipes direct the steam/water mixture (core exit) to the steam separators.  The 
separators are welded to the standpipes and are cross-braced to form a rigid structure 
to prevent vibration.  Each is a centrifugal type separator.  As steam flows into the 
separator, it flows through a stationary swirl vane which imparts rotation/inertia to the 
two phase fluid.  The denser water is thrown radially out, by centrifugal force, forming a 
continuous flow of water against the inside wall of the inner pipe.  Three flow paths 
return the water to the downcomer area. 
 
2.1.3.5.2 Steam Dryer Assembly 
 
The steam dryer assembly (Figure 2.1-13) dries the wet steam coming out of the steam 
separators to greater than 99.9% quality.  It also provides a seal between the wet steam 
area (steam exiting the separators) and the dry steam flowing out the main steam lines.  
The seal is formed by the steam dryer assembly seal skirt extending down below the 
normal water level. 
 
The dryers are a one piece fabricated assembly with no moving parts.  The upper 
section of the assembly consists of steam dryer panels.  Gaps between the panels 
permit steam flow to the main steam lines. 
 
Wet steam is directed horizontally through the dryer panels.  The steam is forced to 
make a series of rapid directional changes while traversing the panels.  During these 
directional changes, the heavier droplets of entrained moisture are forced to the outer 
walls where moisture collection hooks on the edges catch and drain the liquid to 
collection troughs.  The liquid is then directed by drainage tubes through the skirt into 
the reactor vessel annulus region. 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-13 USNRC HRTD 
 

 
Correct alignment of the steam dryer during installation is obtained with the use of the 
same guide rods used by the shroud head/steam separator assembly.  Upward 
movement of the steam dryer assembly is restricted by steam dryer hold down brackets 
which are welded to the underside of the reactor vessel head. 
 
2.1.3.6 Main Steam Outlet Penetrations 
 
Four main steam line nozzles, 24 inch diameter, are installed at the 640 inch level to 
direct steam out of the reactor vessel.  The nozzles are offset.  This non 90° angle of 
the steam lines allows the placement of more dryer panels in the vessel, while leaving 
an open flow area near each steam line (Main Steam System, Section 2.5). 
 
2.1.3.7 Vessel Head Penetrations 
 
The reactor vessel head contains three penetrations (Figure 2.1-1) of which only two 
are normally used after completion of initial startup testing. 
 
The 4" penetration, in the center is the head vent line and provides the dual function of 
venting noncondensible gases from the reactor vessel head area and providing a 
sensing line for shutdown level indication.  During operation, at temperatures less than 
boiling, the noncondensible gases are vented to the drywell equipment drain sump 
through two motor operated valves.  At temperatures above boiling, the vent is directed 
to the "A" main steam line through a motor operated valve (Main Steam, Section 2.5). 
 
The 6" penetration, which is approximately 30 inches radially off center, is used by the 
Residual Heat Removal System (Section 10.4) for head spray.  The head spray line 
sprays water from the RHR system into the upper head area to condense the steam 
remaining during vessel cooldown and vessel flood-up. 
 
The other 6" penetration, which is also 30 inches radially off center, is used during the 
initial plant startup testing program.  During initial startup testing numerous sampling 
and sensing lines are routed from various areas in the reactor vessel to instrument 
racks.  These provide information such as: 
• Vibration and strain measurements of internal components. 
• Steam quality at various locations in the steam separators and dryers. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-14 USNRC HRTD 

2.1.3.8 Vessel External Components 
 
Components external to the reactor vessel are discussed in the paragraphs which 
follow: 
 
2.1.3.8.1 Reactor Vessel Support Skirt 
 
The support skirt (Figure 2.1-14) is welded at the top to the reactor vessel bottom head.  
The support skirt is anchored at the bottom to the vessel support pedestal via a ring 
girder and anchoring bolts.  The support skirt provides vertical support for the reactor 
vessel, internal components, fuel, control rods, and moderator. 
 
2.1.3.8.2 Reactor Vessel Pedestal 
 
The composite steel and concrete reactor pedestal (Figure 2.1-14) provides vertical 
support for the reactor vessel.  The pedestal is constructed of two concentric steel liners 
tied together by diaphragms with the annulus between the liners filled with concrete.  
The support pedestal is constructed as an integral part of the drywell foundation.  Steel 
anchor bolts, set in concrete, extend through a bearing plate and secure the ring girder.  
The ring girder is then bolted to the reactor vessel support skirt. 
 
2.1.3.8.3 Biological Shield 
 
The biological shield (Figure 2.1-14) is a cylindrical structure of high density concrete 
containing vertical and horizontal I-beam support columns.  The biological shield has 
steel inner and outer skins.  The biological shield permits drywell access for 
maintenance after reactor shutdown with a minimum radiation exposure to personnel.  It 
extends the lifetime of drywell components, such as cable insulation, by minimizing 
radiation exposure and also limits neutron activation of components within the drywell, 
which would cause increased radiation exposure to personnel from the activated 
components.  The biological shield also provides horizontal support (Fig. 2.1-15) for the 
upper end of the reactor vessel via 4 spring loaded turn buckles.  Eight pairs of 
stabilizers make up the seismic truss that connects the shield wall to the containment 
wall.  Differential expansion is accommodated by gibs on the containment wall which 
allow vertical movement. 
 
2.1.3.8.4 Vessel Insulation 
 
The reactor vessel insulation (Figure 2.1-17) is an all metal reflective insulation having 
an average maximum heat transfer rate of approximately 80 Btu/hr-ft2 at the operating 
conditions of 550°F for the vessel and 130°F for the drywell atmosphere.  The maximum 
insulation thickness is 4 inches for the upper head.  There is 3½ inches on the 
cylindrical shell and nozzles and 3 inches on the bottom head.  The insulation is 
designed for complete water submersion without insulating material loss, water 
contamination, or loss of insulation efficiency after draining and drying.  The insulation 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-15 USNRC HRTD 
 

panels for the cylindrical shell of the reactor vessel are held in place by supports located 
at two elevations.  The support brackets are welded to the vessel at 12 evenly spaced 
locations around the circumference.  Provisions are made for removing some insulation 
for in-service inspection. 
 
The reactor vessel upper head insulation is removed as a complete unit to facilitate 
head removal during a refueling outage. 
 
2.1.3.8.5 CRD Housing Support Structure 
 
Located below the reactor vessel is the control rod drive housing support structure 
(Figure 2.1-18).  This structure prevents the ejection of a control rod in the unlikely 
event of a control rod drive housing failure while the reactor is pressurized.  This 
structure consists of support beams bolted to brackets on the inside of the reactor 
pedestal. Hanger rods extend downward through spring washers from the support 
beams.  Grid clamps, grid plates, and support bars are bolted to the hanger rods to 
vertically support the bottom end of each control rod drive mechanism and CRD 
housing.  The installation provides approximately a 1 inch gap between bottom of the 
drive mechanism and the support steel when the reactor is cold.  When the reactor is 
hot, this gap reduces to approximately ¼ inch due to differential expansion.  The 
support structure will limit control rod drive mechanism and control rod blade movement 
in the outward direction should a CRD housing fail.  The control rod drive housing 
support structure is an engineered safety feature. 
 
2.1.4 System Features and Interfaces 
 
A short discussion of system features and interfaces this system has with other plant 
systems is given in the paragraphs which follow. 
 
2.1.4.1 System Features 
 
A short discussion of this system's features is given in the paragraphs which follow. 
 
2.1.4.1.1 Reactor Vessel Flow Paths 
 
During operation at rated power, the recirculation pumps and jet pumps provide forced 
flow of coolant through the core at a rate of 77.0 x 106 lb/hr.  Approximately 90% of this 
flow enters the fuel assemblies while 10% bypasses the fuel.  The water absorbs the 
heat energy of the fuel which increases the water temperature to the saturation value 
and boils a portion of the total core flow.  The bypass water flows through the core 
interstitial (outside of the fuel channels) region.  This area includes the area of the 
control rods, neutron monitoring detectors, and helps in the cooling of these other core 
components. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-16 USNRC HRTD 

The steam and water mixture exiting the core is forced to pass through the steam 
separators and then the steam dryer assemblies.  The removed water flows back to the 
annulus area while the steam exits the reactor vessel through the main steam lines.  
Rated steam flow is 10.5 x 106 lb/hr.  The incoming feedwater compensates for the 
mass exiting as steam.  The feedwater flow is varied to maintain normal water level in 
the reactor vessel.  The incoming feedwater temperature (well below saturation), serves 
to subcool the water in the annulus region providing adequate Net Positive Suction 
Head (NPSH) to the recirculation pumps and jet pumps. 
 
Several auxiliary flow paths are also established during normal operation: 
• The head vent valve, is open to vent non-condensible gases in the reactor vessel 

head area to main steam line 'A'. 
• The CRD Hydraulic System supplies about 47 gpm of water to the reactor vessel as 

control rod drive mechanism cooling water flow. 
• The Reactor Water Cleanup System continuously processes approximately 239 gpm 

of reactor water from the recirculation loops and reactor vessel bottom head.  This 
water is returned to the reactor vessel via the feedwater lines. 

 
The various reactor vessel flow paths are shown in Figure 2.1-19. 
 
2.1.4.1.2 Reactor Vessel Limitations 
 
Whenever there is irradiated fuel in the reactor the reactor coolant system pressure 
should not be allowed to exceed 1375 psig.  The reactor vessel is designed for an 
internal design pressure of 1250 psig.   The applicable boiler codes allowing a 10% over 
design pressure condition during transients (i.e., 110% x 1250 psig = 1375 psig).   The 
reactor coolant system pressure is measured at the reactor vessel steam dome.  
Assuming the worst case scenario, that the entire reactor coolant system is full of water 
during an overpressure transient, the weight of the water must be taken into account.  
Since pressure is measured off of the reactor vessel steam space the pressure limit 
must be decreased to allow for the static head associated with the water.  For this 
reason the pressure limit is established at 1325 psig (versus 1375 psig) as displayed on 
control room indication. 
 
In order to avoid excess thermal stresses across the 14" thick reactor vessel flange, the 
reactor coolant temperature should be limited to a maximum heatup or cooldown of 
100°F in any one hour period. 
 
To ensure that the reactor vessel will not behave in a brittle manner when stresses are 
applied, the vessel flange and head flange temperature must be greater than 70°F when 
reactor vessel head bolts are under tension. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-17 USNRC HRTD 
 

2.1.4.1.3 Flow Orificing 
 
In a BWR, as power is increased, the amount of boiling (two phase flow) within a fuel 
assembly also increases.  As two phase flow increases, increased resistance to flow 
occurs.  An increase in the pressure drop across an individual fuel assembly will not 
change the overall core differential pressure.  This increased individual flow resistance 
will cause a reduction in individual bundle flow.  With a decrease in flow to the higher 
powered bundles, more flow will be forced through the lower powered bundles. 
 
Both the four lobed and the peripheral fuel support pieces incorporate flow orifices.  
These ensure a balanced flow for each fuel assembly.  A flow orifice in the fuel support 
piece will cause a large pressure drop in comparison to the pressure drop internal to the 
bundle.  With the majority of the pressure drop across the orifice any changes in two 
phase flow within individual fuel assemblies will cause insignificant changes in overall 
assembly differential pressure.  This will balance the flow distribution between higher 
and lower powered fuel assemblies. 
 
For the purpose of orificing, the core is divided into two zones.  The central zone 
consists of only regular 4 bundle fuel support pieces and has smaller orifice sizes.  The 
peripheral zone consists of both regular 4 bundle fuel support pieces and all the 
individual peripheral support pieces with larger orifice sizes. 
 
2.1.4.1.4 Core Floodability 
 
The Emergency Core Cooling Systems and the reactor vessel are designed to ensure 
that the core can be adequately cooled following a LOCA. 
 
The postulated worst case LOCA, with respect to core cooling, is a recirculation line 
break with the reactor at full power.  During this case LOCA, the reactor vessel water 
level rapidly decreases uncovering the core.  However, there are several systems that 
automatically provide makeup water to the reactor vessel within the core shroud.  The 
level inside the shroud will increase until it reaches the level of the top of the jet pump 
mixing sections.  The water then spills out of the jet pumps into the annulus area and 
out through the broken recirculation line.  This elevation is approximately ⅔ of the height 
of the core. 
 
If flooding of the reactor vessel is accomplished within the designed time frame, and if 
the level is maintained at the ⅔ core coverage point, the core will be adequately cooled 
and the integrity of the fuel cladding will be maintained.  The lower ⅔ of the core will be 
cooled because it is submerged and the upper ⅓ of the core will be cooled by a mixture 
of steam and water flowing upward because of the boiling in the lower ⅔ of the core. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-18 USNRC HRTD 

2.1.4.2 System Interfaces 
 
A short discussion of interfaces this system has with other plant systems is given in the 
paragraphs which follow. 
 
Fuel and Control Rods System (Section 2.2) 
 
The fuel and control rods are located in the core region and are vertically supported by 
reactor vessel components. 
 
Control Rod Drive System (Section 2.3) 
 
The CRD Hydraulic System provides cooling and hydraulic driving water to the control 
rod drive mechanisms mounted in the 137 CRD housings of the reactor vessel. 
 
Recirculation System (Section 2.4) 
 
The Recirculation System provides forced circulation of the reactor coolant to yield a 
higher power density than would be possible under natural circulation conditions. 
 
Main Steam System (Section 2.5) 
 
The four main steam lines provide a flow path for steam from the reactor vessel to the 
main turbine and other balance of plant steam load.  The reactor head area is also 
vented to the Main Steam System. 
 
Condensate and Feedwater System (Section 2.6) 
 
The Condensate and Feedwater System provides high purity water to the reactor vessel 
to maintain a constant reactor vessel water level. 
 
Reactor Water Cleanup System (Section 2.8) 
 
The RWCU System maintains the reactor coolant at high purity and provides a means 
of draining water from the reactor vessel.  Suction is taken from both recirculation loops 
and the bottom head drain, and returned through the feedwater system. 
 
Reactor Vessel Instrumentation System (Section 3.1) 
 
The reactor vessel level, pressure, and flow instrumentation uses instrument lines which 
penetrate the reactor vessel.  Reactor vessel temperature instrumentation uses 
thermocouple pads at various vessel locations and at the bottom head drain. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-19 USNRC HRTD 
 

Source Range Monitoring System (Section 5.1) 
 
The SRM detectors and sources are located inside the reactor vessel. 
 
Intermediate Range Monitoring System (Section 5.2) 
 
The IRM detectors are located inside the reactor vessel. 
 
Local Power Range Monitoring System (Section 5.3) 
 
The LPRM detectors are located inside the reactor vessel core region. 
 
Traversing Incore Probe System (Section 5.6) 
 
The TIP detectors can be inserted into the reactor vessel core region. 
 
Standby Liquid Control System (Section 7.4) 
 
The SLC System injects a neutron absorbing solution (sodium pentaborate) into the 
reactor vessel to shutdown the reactor in the unlikely event of a failure of the CRD 
System.  Injection is through the below core plate sparger. 
 
Core Spray (CS) System (Section 10.3) 
 
The CS System provides for low pressure spraying of the core in the event of a LOCA.  
The water enters the reactor vessel via spray spargers located above the top guide. 
 
Residual Heat Removal System (Section 10.4) 
 
The Low Pressure Coolant Injection (LPCI) mode provides flooding water to the reactor 
vessel via the recirculation system discharge piping to cool the fuel in the event of a 
LOCA.  The shutdown cooling mode provides for the removal of decay heat from the 
fuel during normal reactor shutdown conditions.  Suction is taken from the recirculation 
loop suction piping and discharged back to a LPCI mode injection line and the head 
spray nozzle. 
 



 

 
Rev 09/11 2.1-20 USNRC HRTD 

2.1.5 Summary 
 
Classification - Safety Related 
 
Purposes: 

1. To house the reactor core. 
2. To support and align the fuel and control rods. 
3. To provide a flow path for the circulation of coolant past the fuel. 
4. To remove moisture from the steam exiting the reactor vessel.  
5. To provide an internal, refloodable volume to assure core cooling capability following 

a LOCA. 
6. To serve as part of the reactor coolant boundary. 
7. To limit downward control rod motion following a postulated failure of a control rod 

drive housing. 
 
Components - Reactor vessel; various penetrations; feedwater spargers; surveillance 
sample holders; jet pump assemblies; baffle plate; control rod drive housing; control rod 
guide tubes; core shroud; core plate; top guide; fuel support pieces; fuel assemblies; 
control rods; incore housings and guide tubes; core spray spargers; shroud head; steam 
separator assembly; steam dryer assembly; support skirt; biological shield; CRD 
housing support structure; vessel insulation. 
 
System Interfaces - Fuel and Control Rod System; Control Rod Drive System; 
Recirculation System; Main Steam System; Condensate and Feedwater System; 
Reactor Water Cleanup System; Reactor Vessel Instrumentation System; Source 
Range Monitoring System; Intermediate Range Monitoring System; Local Power Range 
Monitoring System; Traversing Incore Probe System; Standby Liquid Control System; 
Core Spray System; Residual Heat Removal System. 



 

 Figure 2.1-1 Reactor Vessel Cutaway  

HEAD SPRAY
COOLING NOZZLE

REACTOR VESSEL HEAD

DRYER ASSEMBLY
LIFTING LUGS

STEAM DRYER ASSEMBLY

STEAM OUTLET NOZZLE

SHROUD HEAD
LIFTING LUGS

DRYER SEAL SKIRT

SHROUD HEAD

CORE SPRAY
SUPPLY HEADER

SHROUD HEAD
HOLD-DOWN BOLTS

SHROUD HEAD
FLOOR SUPPORT LEGS

JET PUMP INLET ELBOW
AND NOZZLE ASSEMBLY

JET PUMP RISER BRACE ARM

IN-CORE FLUX MONITOR
ASSEMBLY

JET PUMP MIXER

RECIRCULATING WATER
INLET NOZZLE

VESSEL SUPPORT SKIRT

JET PUMP INLET RISER

JET PUMP DIFFUSER

VESSEL SUPPORT
RING GIRDER

IN-CORE FLUX MONITOR
HOUSING

VESSEL HEAD STUD

VESSEL HEAD NUT

STEAM DRYER AND
SHROUD HEAD ALIGNMENT
AND GUIDE RODS

STEAM SEPARATOR AND
STANDPIPE ASSEMBLY

FEEDWATER INLET

FEEDWATER SPARGER

VESSEL WALL

TOP GUIDE

SHROUD HEAD ALIGNMENT
PINS

CORE SPRAY SPARGER

FUEL ASSEMBLY

FUEL SUPPORT

CORE SHROUD

CORE PLATE

CORE DIFFERENTIAL
PRESSURE TAP & LIQUID
CONTROL INLET NOZZLE

CONTROL ROD
GUIDE TUBE

CONTROL ROD DRIVE HOUSING
SUPPORT STRUCTURE

CONTROL ROD
DRIVE HOUSING

RECIRCULATING WATER
OUTLET NOZZLE

CONTROL ROD

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-2 Reactor Vessel Cutaway  

INSTRUMENT NOZZLE/VENT

SPARE

VESSEL HEAD

VESSEL HEAD STUD

GUIDE ROD BRACKET

SHELL VESSEL FLANGE

REFUELING BELLOWS

STEAM DRYER

STEAM SEPARATOR

FEEDWATER SPARGER

CONTROL ROD
HYDRAULIC RETURN

CORE SPRAY
SPARGER

RECIRCULATION
OUTLET NOZZLE

CONTROL ROD
GUIDE TUBE

CONTROL ROD DRIVE
PENETRATION

HEAD SPRAY

STEAM DRYER
HOLD DOWN BRACKET

HEAD NUT

SEAL LEAK DETECTION

STEAM OUTLET
NOZZLE

STEAM DRYER
SUPPORT BRACKET

INSTRUMENTATION
NOZZLE

STABLIZER
BRACKET

CORE SPRAY NOZZLE

INSULATION SUPPORT

CORE SHROUD

JET PUMP RISER

JET PUMP RISER SUPPORT
PAD AND BRACE

CORE SUPPORT

RECIRCULATION
INLET NOZZLE

JET PUMP
INSTRUMENTATION
NOZZLE

CORE SHROUD SUPPORT

CORE DIFFERENTIAL
PRESSURE LIQUID
CONTROL NOZZLE

VESSEL SUPPORT SKIRT

INCORE PENETRATION

FEEDWATER NOZZLE

INSULATION SUPPORT

INSTRUMENTATION
NOZZLE

INSTRUMENTATION
NOZZLE

SHROUD HEAD

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-3 Typical Feedwater Sparger  

 



 

 

 



 

 Figure 2.1-4 Jet Pump Assembly  

LIFTING EYE

SUCTION INLET

RISER BRACE ARMS

INLET RISER

WEDGE AND RESTRAINER
(TYPICAL OF 2)

REACTOR PRESSURE
VESSEL RECIRCULATION
INLET NOZZLE
(1 TO EACH JETPUMP RISER)

REACTOR
PRESSURE VESSEL

DIFFUSER
(TYPICAL OF 2)

CORE PLATE

CORE SHROUD

MIXING ASSEMBLY
(TYPICAL OF 2)

JET PUMP NOZZLE

INLET ELBOW

HOLD DOWNS



 

 Figure 2.1-5 Differential Pressure and Standby Liquid Control Line 

 
DIFFERENTIAL PRESSURE LINE

STANDBY LIQUID CONTROL
INJECTION LINE

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-6 Control Rod Guide Tube To Control Rod Drive Housing Attachment 

 

TOP VIEW OF TOP OF
THERMAL SLEEVE

CONTROL ROD
GUIDE TUBE

ALIGNMENT LUG

CONTROL ROD DRIVE
THERMAL SLEEVE

STUB TUBE

REACTOR VESSEL

CONTROL ROD
DRIVE HOUSING

KEYWAY FOR SECURING
THERMAL SLEEVE

FLANGE

 



 

 Figure 2.1-7 Core Shroud  

1 OF 2 SHROUD
HEAD ALIGNMENT

LUGS

JET PUMP
DIFFUSER

RECIRCULATION
PUMP SUCTION

NOZZLE

BAFFLE
PLATE

CORE SPRAY INLET PIPE
(TYPICAL OF 4)

1 OF 4 CORE
SPRAY SPARGERS

CORE SPRAY
SPARGERS

UPPER CORE SHROUD

TOP GUIDE

MIDDLE CORE SHROUD

JET PUMP RISER

RECIRCULATION
LOOP INLET NOZZLE

CORE PLATE

LOWER CORE SHROUD

BAFFLE PLATE
COLUMN MEMBERS



 

 Figure 2.1-8 Core Plate  

NEUTRON SOURCE HOLE
SECTION C-C

CL

SECTION B-B

SECTION A-A

ALIGNMENT PINS FOR FUEL SUPPORT
CASTING AND CONTROL ROD GUIDE TUBE PERIPHERAL FUEL

SUPPORT

CORE PLATE
INSTALLATION
LIFT POINTS

STIFFENER
RODS

STIFFENER
RODS

STIFFENER
PLATE

SLEEVES FOR SRM & IRM
INCORE GUIDE TUBES

NEUTRON SOURCE LOCATIONS

PERIPHERAL
FUEL SUPPORT (12)

AA

HOLE FOR CONTROL ROD
GUIDE TUBE (137)

ALIGNMENT PAD
(ON SHROUD)

STIFFENER
RODS

HOLE FOR IN
CORE GUIDE
TUBE (43)

ALIGNMENT PIN FOR
FUEL SUPPORT CASTING
AND CONTROL ROD
GUIDE TUBE

BOLTS SECURING
CORE PLATE TO
SHROUD

 
  



 

 Figure 2.1-9 Fuel Cell Arrangement  

TOP GUIDE

NMS ASSEMBLY

CONTROL ROD

CORE PLATE

CORE PLATE
SUPPORT STRUCTURE

REACTOR VESSEL

CONTROL ROD
VELOCITY LIMITER

FUEL ASSEMBLY

FUEL SUPPORT PIECE

FLOW INLET
INTO FUEL

BUNDLE

CONTROL ROD
GUIDE TUBE

CONTROL ROD
BLADE

CONTROL ROD
DRIVE HOUSING

STUB TUBE



 

 Figure 2.1-10 Fuel Support Pieces  

 



 

 Figure 2.1-11 Core Spray Piping In Vessel  

FROM CORE SPRAY
SYSTEM II

FROM CORE SPRAY
SYSTEM I

SYSTEM I NOZZLES

SYSTEM II NOZZLES

SHROUD



 

 Figure 2.1-12 Shroud Head and Steam Separator Assembly  

 

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-13 Steam Dryer Assembly  

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-14 Vessel Support and Biological Shield Wall  

 
 
 

Detail "A"

Detail "A"

Reactor
Pedestal

Drywell

Biological
Shield

Vessel Support
Skirt

Ring
Girder

Biological Shield to
Containment StabilizersReactor Vessel to

Bio. Shield Stabilizers

Refueling Bellows

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-15 Reactor Vessel Lateral Support  

BIOLOGICAL
SHIELD TO

CONTAINMENT
STABILIZERS

BIOLOGICAL
SHIELD WALL

315°

270°

225°

B

SECTION A-A
(FROM FIGURE 3)

135°

90°

45°

0°

GIB EMBEDDED
IN CONCRETE

0.010
GAP

10" PIPE

REACTOR
VESSEL

CONTAINMENT STIFFENER RINGS

B

BIOLOGICAL SHIELD TO
CONTAINMENT STABILIZERS

BIOLOGICAL
SHIELD WALL

DRYWELL

DRYWELL

REACTOR VESSEL TO
BIOLOGICAL SHIELD

STABILIZERS

SECTION B-B
(FROM ABOVE)

CONTAINMENT
STIFFENER RINGS

REACTOR
VESSEL

ACCOMMODATES
DIFFERENTIAL
EXPANSION

GIB

180°

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-16 Reactor Vessel Closure Assembly  

To Drywell

Closure Stud

Stud Nut

Spherical Washer

Vessel Head

Metallic "O" Rings

Drilled Passage

Refueling Bellows
Assembly

Leak Detection LineReactor Vessel

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-17 Reactor Vessel Insulation  

SPLIT SECTIONS
REMOVABLE TO
UNBOLT HEAD LINES

VESSEL HEAD
REMOVABLE
INSULATION

VESSEL STABILIZER
BRACKET CUTOUTS

BIOLOGICAL
SHIELD WALL

INSULATION
SUPPORT BRACKETS
TYPICAL

NOTE:
VESSEL HEAD INSULATION
4 IN. THICK MAX. VESSEL
SHELL AND BOTTOM HEAD
INSULATION 3 1/2 IN. AND
3 IN. THICK MAX.
RESPECTIVELY.�

BOTTOM HEAD
INSULATION
NOT REMOVABLE

TYPICAL NOZZLE
INSULATION

~22' SHIELD WALL ID

~24' SHIELD WALL OD

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-18 Control Rod Drive Housing Support  

 

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-19 Reactor Vessel Flow Path  

 
 
 

Steam Dryer

Steam Outlet
(Typical of 4)

Reactor Water Level

Steam Separator

Feedwater Inlet
(Typical of 4)

Jet Pump Nozzle

Fuel Assembly

Fuel Support Piece

Recirculation Loop Suction

Control Rod
Guide Tube

CRD Housing

CRD Mechanism
Cooling Water

To Reactor Water Cleanup
System Suction

Core Plate

Recirculation Inlet
(Typical of 10)

Recirculation Loop Suction

Jet Pump

Top Guide

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-20 Core Flooding Capability of Recirculation System 

TAF

BAF

Normal Water Level

Water level after
break in recirculation
loop ~ 2/3 active core

coverage
Active Core

Steam Separator
Distribution Plenum

Steam Separator

 
 



 

 Figure 2.1-21 Standby Liquid Control Sparger Layout  

P

Standby Liquid Control
(Na B O - 10 H 0)

2 10 16 2

Above Core Plate Tap
Jet Pump

Shroud

Core Plate

Vessel Wall

Standby Liquid
Sparger

 



<<
  /ASCII85EncodePages false
  /AllowTransparency false
  /AutoPositionEPSFiles true
  /AutoRotatePages /PageByPage
  /Binding /Left
  /CalGrayProfile (None)
  /CalRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CalCMYKProfile (U.S. Web Coated \050SWOP\051 v2)
  /sRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CannotEmbedFontPolicy /Warning
  /CompatibilityLevel 1.4
  /CompressObjects /Tags
  /CompressPages true
  /ConvertImagesToIndexed true
  /PassThroughJPEGImages true
  /CreateJDFFile false
  /CreateJobTicket true
  /DefaultRenderingIntent /Default
  /DetectBlends true
  /DetectCurves 0.1000
  /ColorConversionStrategy /UseDeviceIndependentColor
  /DoThumbnails false
  /EmbedAllFonts true
  /EmbedOpenType false
  /ParseICCProfilesInComments true
  /EmbedJobOptions true
  /DSCReportingLevel 0
  /EmitDSCWarnings false
  /EndPage -1
  /ImageMemory 1048576
  /LockDistillerParams false
  /MaxSubsetPct 100
  /Optimize true
  /OPM 1
  /ParseDSCComments true
  /ParseDSCCommentsForDocInfo true
  /PreserveCopyPage true
  /PreserveDICMYKValues true
  /PreserveEPSInfo true
  /PreserveFlatness true
  /PreserveHalftoneInfo false
  /PreserveOPIComments true
  /PreserveOverprintSettings true
  /StartPage 1
  /SubsetFonts true
  /TransferFunctionInfo /Preserve
  /UCRandBGInfo /Preserve
  /UsePrologue false
  /ColorSettingsFile ()
  /AlwaysEmbed [ true
  ]
  /NeverEmbed [ true
  ]
  /AntiAliasColorImages false
  /CropColorImages true
  /ColorImageMinResolution 150
  /ColorImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleColorImages false
  /ColorImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /ColorImageResolution 150
  /ColorImageDepth 8
  /ColorImageMinDownsampleDepth 1
  /ColorImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeColorImages true
  /ColorImageFilter /FlateEncode
  /AutoFilterColorImages false
  /ColorImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /ColorACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.76
    /HSamples [2 1 1 2] /VSamples [2 1 1 2]
  >>
  /ColorImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.76
    /HSamples [2 1 1 2] /VSamples [2 1 1 2]
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 15
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 15
  >>
  /AntiAliasGrayImages false
  /CropGrayImages true
  /GrayImageMinResolution 150
  /GrayImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleGrayImages false
  /GrayImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /GrayImageResolution 150
  /GrayImageDepth 8
  /GrayImageMinDownsampleDepth 2
  /GrayImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeGrayImages true
  /GrayImageFilter /FlateEncode
  /AutoFilterGrayImages false
  /GrayImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /GrayACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.76
    /HSamples [2 1 1 2] /VSamples [2 1 1 2]
  >>
  /GrayImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.76
    /HSamples [2 1 1 2] /VSamples [2 1 1 2]
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 15
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 15
  >>
  /AntiAliasMonoImages false
  /CropMonoImages true
  /MonoImageMinResolution 1200
  /MonoImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleMonoImages false
  /MonoImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /MonoImageResolution 1200
  /MonoImageDepth -1
  /MonoImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeMonoImages false
  /MonoImageFilter /CCITTFaxEncode
  /MonoImageDict <<
    /K -1
  >>
  /AllowPSXObjects false
  /CheckCompliance [
    /None
  ]
  /PDFX1aCheck false
  /PDFX3Check false
  /PDFXCompliantPDFOnly false
  /PDFXNoTrimBoxError true
  /PDFXTrimBoxToMediaBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXSetBleedBoxToMediaBox true
  /PDFXBleedBoxToTrimBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXOutputIntentProfile (None)
  /PDFXOutputConditionIdentifier ()
  /PDFXOutputCondition ()
  /PDFXRegistryName ()
  /PDFXTrapped /False

  /Description <<
    /CHS <FEFF4f7f75288fd94e9b8bbe5b9a521b5efa7684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065876863900275284e8e55464e1a65876863768467e5770b548c62535370300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c676562535f00521b5efa768400200050004400460020658768633002>
    /CHT <FEFF4f7f752890194e9b8a2d7f6e5efa7acb7684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065874ef69069752865bc666e901a554652d965874ef6768467e5770b548c52175370300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c4f86958b555f5df25efa7acb76840020005000440046002065874ef63002>
    /DAN <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>
    /DEU <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>
    /ESP <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>
    /FRA <FEFF005500740069006c006900730065007a00200063006500730020006f007000740069006f006e00730020006100660069006e00200064006500200063007200e900650072002000640065007300200064006f00630075006d0065006e00740073002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002000700072006f00660065007300730069006f006e006e0065006c007300200066006900610062006c0065007300200070006f007500720020006c0061002000760069007300750061006c00690073006100740069006f006e0020006500740020006c00270069006d007000720065007300730069006f006e002e0020004c0065007300200064006f00630075006d0065006e00740073002000500044004600200063007200e900e90073002000700065007500760065006e0074002000ea0074007200650020006f007500760065007200740073002000640061006e00730020004100630072006f006200610074002c002000610069006e00730069002000710075002700410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e0030002000650074002000760065007200730069006f006e007300200075006c007400e90072006900650075007200650073002e>
    /ITA (Utilizzare queste impostazioni per creare documenti Adobe PDF adatti per visualizzare e stampare documenti aziendali in modo affidabile. I documenti PDF creati possono essere aperti con Acrobat e Adobe Reader 5.0 e versioni successive.)
    /JPN <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>
    /KOR <FEFFc7740020c124c815c7440020c0acc6a9d558c5ec0020be44c988b2c8c2a40020bb38c11cb97c0020c548c815c801c73cb85c0020bcf4ace00020c778c1c4d558b2940020b3700020ac00c7a50020c801d569d55c002000410064006f0062006500200050004400460020bb38c11cb97c0020c791c131d569b2c8b2e4002e0020c774b807ac8c0020c791c131b41c00200050004400460020bb38c11cb2940020004100630072006f0062006100740020bc0f002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020c774c0c1c5d0c11c0020c5f40020c2180020c788c2b5b2c8b2e4002e>
    /NLD (Gebruik deze instellingen om Adobe PDF-documenten te maken waarmee zakelijke documenten betrouwbaar kunnen worden weergegeven en afgedrukt. De gemaakte PDF-documenten kunnen worden geopend met Acrobat en Adobe Reader 5.0 en hoger.)
    /NOR <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>
    /PTB <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>
    /SUO <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>
    /SVE <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>
    /ENU (Use these settings to create Adobe PDF documents suitable for reliable viewing and printing of business documents.  Created PDF documents can be opened with Acrobat and Adobe Reader 5.0 and later.)
  >>
>> setdistillerparams
<<
  /HWResolution [300 300]
  /PageSize [612.000 792.000]
>> setpagedevice


